Science 100Control and
Coordination6 CHAPTER
In the pr evious chapter , we looked at life processes involved in the
maintenance functions in living organisms. There, we had started with
a notion we all have, that if we see something moving, it is alive. Some of
these movements are in fact the result of growth, as in plants. A seed
germinates and grows, and we can see that the seedling moves over the
course of a few days, it pushes soil aside and comes out. But if its growth
were to be stopped, these movements would not happen. Some
movements, as in many animals and some plants, are not connected
with growth. A cat running, children playing on swings, buffaloes
chewing cud – these are not movements caused by growth.
Why do we associate such visible movements with life? A possible
answer is that we think of movement as a response to a change in the
environment of the organism. The cat may be running because it has
seen a mouse.  Not only that, we also think of movement as an attempt
by living organisms to use changes in their environment to their
advantage. Plants grow out into the sunshine. Children try to get pleasure
and fun out of swinging. Buffaloes chew cud to help break up tough
food so as to be able to digest it better . When bright light is focussed on
our eyes or when we touch a hot object, we detect the change and respond
to it with movement in order to protect ourselves.
If we think a bit more about this, it becomes apparent that all this
movement, in response to the environment, is carefully controlled. Each
kind of a change in the environment evokes an appropriate movement
in response. When we want to talk to our friends in class, we whisper ,
rather than shouting loudly. Clearly, the movement to be made depends
on the event that is triggering it. Therefore, such controlled movement
must be connected to the recognition of various events in the
environment, followed by only the correct movement in response. In other
words, living organisms must use systems providing control and
coordination. In keeping with the general principles of body organisation
in multicellular organisms, specialised tissues are used to provide these
control and coordination activities.
6.16.16.16.16.1ANIMALS – NERVOUS SYSTEMANIMALS – NERVOUS SYSTEMANIMALS – NERVOUS SYSTEMANIMALS – NERVOUS SYSTEMANIMALS – NERVOUS SYSTEM
In animals, such control and coordination are provided by nervous and
muscular tissues, which we have studied  in Class IX. Touching a hot
Reprint 2025-26
Control and Coordination 101object is an urgent and dangerous
situation for us. W e need to detect it,
and respond to it. How do we detect that
we are touching a hot object? All
information from our environment is
detected by the specialised tips of some
nerve cells. These receptors are usually
located in our sense organs, such as the
inner ear , the nose, the tongue, and so
on. So gustatory receptors will detect taste
while olfactory receptors will detect smell.
This information, acquired at the
end of the dendritic tip of a nerve cell
[Fig. 6.1 (a)],  sets off a chemical reaction
that creates an electrical impulse. This
impulse travels from the dendrite to the
cell body, and then along the axon to its
end. At the end of the axon, the electrical
impulse sets off the release of some
chemicals. These chemicals cross the
gap, or synapse, and start a similar
electrical impulse in a dendrite of the next
neuron. This is a general scheme of how
nervous impulses travel in the body. A
similar synapse finally allows delivery of such impulses from neurons to
other cells, such as muscles cells or gland  [Fig. 6.1 (b)].
It is thus no surprise that nervous tissue is made up of an organised
network of nerve cells or neurons, and is specialised for conducting
information via electrical impulses fr om one part of the body to another .
Look at Fig. 6.1 (a) and identify the parts of a neuron (i) where
information is acquired, (ii) through which information travels as an
electrical impulse, and (iii) where this impulse must be converted into a
chemical signal for onward transmi ssion.
Activity 6.1Activity 6.1Activity 6.1Activity 6.1Activity 6.1
Put some sugar in your mouth. How does it taste?
Block your nose by pressing it between your thumb and index
finger . Now eat sugar again. Is ther e any dif ference in its taste?
While eating lunch, block your nose in the same way and notice if
you can fully appreciate the taste of the food you are eating.
Is there a difference in how sugar and food taste if your nose is
blocked? If so, why might this be happening? Read and talk about
possible explanations for these kinds of differences. Do you come across
a similar situation when you have a cold?
Figure 6.1 Figure 6.1 Figure 6.1 Figure 6.1 Figure 6.1 (a) Structure of neuron, (b)      Neuromuscular
junction(a)
(b)
Reprint 2025-26
Science 1026.1.1 What happens in Reflex Actions?
‘Reflex’ is a word we use very commonly when we talk about some sudden
action in r esponse to something in the envir onment. W e say ‘I jumped
out of the way of the bus reflexly’, or ‘I pulled my hand back from the
flame reflexly’, or ‘I was so hungry my mouth started watering reflexly’.
What exactly do we mean? A common idea in all such examples is that
we do something without thinking about it, or without feeling in control
of our r eactions. Y et these ar e situations wher e we ar e responding with
some action to changes in our environment. How is control and
coordination achieved in such situations?
Let us consider this further . Take one of our examples. T ouching a
flame is an urgent and dangerous situation for us, or in fact, for any
animal! How would we respond to this? One seemingly simple way is to
think consciously about the pain and the possibility of getting burnt,
and therefore move our hand. An important question then is, how long
will it take us to think all this? The answer depends on how we think.  If
nerve impulses ar e sent ar ound the way we have talked about earlier ,
then thinking is also likely to involve the creation of such impulses.
Thinking is a complex activity, so it is bound to involve a complicated
interaction of many nerve impulses from many neurons.
If this is the case, it is no surprise that the thinking tissue in our
body consists of dense networks of intricately arranged neurons. It sits
in the forward end of the skull, and receives signals from all over the
body which it thinks about before responding to them. Obviously, in
order to receive these signals, this thinking part of the brain in the skull
must be connected to nerves coming from various parts of the body.
Similarly, if this part of the brain is to instruct muscles to move, nerves
must carry this signal back to different parts of the body. If all of this is
to be done when we touch a hot object, it may take enough time for us to
get burnt!
How does the design of the body solve this problem? Rather than
having to think about the sensation of heat, if the nerves that detect heat
were to be connected to the nerves that move muscles in a simpler way,
the process of detecting the signal or the input and responding to it by
an output action might be completed quickly. Such a connection is
commonly called a reflex arc (Fig. 6.2). Where should such reflex arc
connections be made between the input nerve and the output nerve?
The best place, of course, would be at the point where they first meet
each other . Nerves fr om all over the body meet in a bundle in the spinal
cord on their way to the brain. Reflex arcs are formed in this spinal cord
itself, although the information input also goes on to reach the brain.
Of course, reflex arcs have evolved in animals because the thinking
process of the brain is not fast enough.  In fact many animals have very
little or none of the complex neuron network needed for thinking. So it is
quite likely that reflex arcs have evolved as efficient ways of functioning
in the absence of true thought pr ocesses.  However , even after complex
neuron networks have come into existence, reflex arcs continue to be
more efficient for quick responses.
Reprint 2025-26
Control and Coordination 103Can you now trace the sequence of events which occur when a bright
light is focussed on your eyes?
6.1.2 Human Brain
Is reflex action the only function of the spinal cord? Obviously not, since
we know that we are thinking beings. Spinal cord is made up of nerves
which supply information to think about. Thinking involves more
complex mechanisms and neural connections. These are concentrated
in the brain, which is the main coordinating centre of the body.  The
brain and spinal cord constitute the central nervous system (Fig. 6.3).
They receive information from all parts of the body and integrate it.
We also think about our actions. W riting, talking, moving a chair,
clapping at the end of a programme are examples of voluntary actions
which are based on deciding what to do next.  So, the brain also has to
send messages to muscles.  This is the second way in which the nervous
system communicates with the muscles.  The communication between
the central nervous system and the other parts of the body is facilitated
by the peripheral nervous system consisting of cranial nerves arising
from the brain and spinal nerves arising from the spinal cord. The brain
thus allows us to think and take actions based on that thinking.  As you
will expect, this is accomplished through a complex design, with different
parts of the brain responsible for integrating different inputs and outputs.
The brain has three such major parts or regions, namely the fore-brain,
mid-brain and hind-brain.
The fore-brain is the main thinking part of the brain. It has regions
which receive sensory impulses from various receptors. Separate areas
of the fore-brain are specialised for hearing, smell, sight and so on.  There
are separate areas of association where this sensory information is
interpreted by putting it together with information from other receptors
as well as with information that is already stored in the brain.  Based onFigure 6.2 Figure 6.2 Figure 6.2 Figure 6.2 Figure 6.2 Reflex arc
Reprint 2025-26
Science 104all this, a decision is made about how to respond and the information is
passed on to the motor areas which control the movement of voluntary
muscles, for example, our leg muscles.  However , certain sensations ar e
distinct from seeing or hearing, for example, how do we know that we
have eaten enough? The sensation of feeling full is because of a centre
associated with  hunger , which is in a separate part of the for e-brain.
Study the labelled diagram of the human brain. W e have seen that
the different parts have specific functions. Can we find out the function
of each part?
Let us look at the other use of the word ‘reflex’ that we have talked
about in the introduction. Our mouth waters when we see food we like
without our meaning to. Our hearts beat without our thinking about it.
In fact, we cannot control these actions easily by thinking about them
even if we wanted to. Do we have to think about or remember to breathe
or digest food? So, in between the simple reflex actions like change in
the size of the pupil, and the thought out actions such as moving a
chair , ther e is another set of muscle movements over which we do not
have any thinking control. Many of these involuntary actions are
controlled by the mid-brain and hind-brain. All these involuntary actions
including blood pressure, salivation and vomiting are controlled by the
medulla in the hind-brain.
Think about activities like walking in a straight line, riding a bicycle,
picking up a pencil. These are possible due to a part of the hind-brain
called the cerebellum. It is responsible for precision of voluntary actions
and maintaining the posture and balance of the body. Imagine what
would happen if each of these events failed to take place if we were not
thinking about it.Figure 6.3Figure 6.3Figure 6.3Figure 6.3Figure 6.3  H u m a n  b r a i n
Reprint 2025-26
Control and Coordination 1056.1.3 How are these Tissues protected?
A delicate organ like the brain, which is so important for a variety of
activities, needs to be carefully protected. For this, the body is designed
so that the brain sits inside a bony box. Inside the box, the brain is
contained in a fluid-filled balloon which provides further shock
absorption. If you run your hand down the middle of your back, you
will feel a hard, bumpy structure. This is the vertebral column or
backbone which protects the spinal cord.
6.1.4 How does the Nervous Tissue cause Action?
So far , we have been talking about nervous tissue, and how it collects
information, sends it around the body, processes information, makes
decisions based on information, and conveys decisions to muscles for
action. In other words, when the action or movement is to be performed,
muscle tissue will do the final job. How do animal muscles move? When
a nerve impulse reaches the muscle, the muscle fibre must move. How
does a muscle cell move? The simplest notion of movement at the cellular
level is that muscle cells will move by changing their shape so that they
shorten. So the next question is, how do muscle cells change their shape?
The answer must lie in the chemistry of cellular components. Muscle
cells have special proteins that change both their shape and their
arrangement in the cell in response to nervous electrical impulses. When
this happens, new arrangements of these proteins give the muscle cells
a shorter form. Remember when we talked about muscle tissue in
Class IX, there were different kinds of muscles, such as voluntary muscles
and involuntary muscles. Based on what we have discussed so far , what
do you think the differences between these would be?
QUESTIONS
?1. What is the difference between a reflex action and walking?
2. What happens at the synapse between two neurons?
3. Which part of the brain maintains posture and equilibrium of the body?
4. How do we detect the smell of an agarbatti (incense stick)?
5. What is the role of the brain in reflex action?
6.2 COORDINA6.2 COORDINA6.2 COORDINA6.2 COORDINA6.2 COORDINA TION IN PLTION IN PLTION IN PLTION IN PLTION IN PL ANTS ANTSANTSANTSANTS
Animals have a nervous system for controlling and coordinating the
activities of the body. But plants have neither a nervous system nor
muscles. So, how do they respond to stimuli? When we touch the leaves
of a chhui-mui  (the ‘sensitive’ or ‘touch-me-not’ plant of the Mimosa
family), they begin to fold up and droop. When a seed germinates, the
root goes down, the stem comes up into the air . What happens? Firstly,
the leaves of the sensitive plant move very quickly in response to touch.
Reprint 2025-26
Science 106There is no growth involved in this movement. On the other hand, the
directional movement of a seedling is caused by growth. If it is prevented
from growing, it will not show any movement. So plants show two different
types of movement – one dependent on growth and the other independent
of growth.
6.2.1 Immediate Response to Stimulus
Let us think about the first kind of movement, such as that of the sensitive
plant. Since no growth is involved, the plant must actually move its leaves
in response to touch. But there is no nervous tissue, nor any muscle
tissue. How does the plant detect the touch, and how do the leaves move
in response?
Figure 6.4Figure 6.4Figure 6.4Figure 6.4Figure 6.4  T h e  s e n s i t i v e  p l a n t
If we think about where exactly the plant is touched, and what part
of the plant actually moves, it is apparent that movement happens at a
point different from the point of touch. So, information that a touch has
occurred must be communicated. The plants also use electrical-chemical
means to convey this information from cell to cell, but unlike in animals,
there is no specialised tissue in plants for the conduction of information.
Finally, again as in animals, some cells must change shape in order for
movement to happen. Instead of the specialised proteins found in animal
muscle cells, plant cells change shape by changing the amount of water
in them, resulting in swelling or shrinking, and therefore in changing
shapes (Fig. 6.4).
6.2.2 Movement Due to Growth
Some plants like the pea plant climb up other plants or fences by means
of tendrils. These tendrils are sensitive to touch. When they come in
contact with any support, the part of the tendril in contact with the object
does not grow as rapidly as the part of the tendril away from the object.
This causes the tendril to circle around the object and thus cling to it.
More commonly, plants respond to stimuli slowly by growing in a
particular direction. Because this growth is directional, it appears as if
the plant is moving. Let us understand this type of movement with the
help of an example.
Reprint 2025-26
Control and Coordination 107Environmental triggers such as light, or gravity
will change the directions that plant parts grow in.
These directional, or tropic, movements can be either
towards the stimulus, or away from it. So, in two
different kinds of phototropic movement, shoots
respond by bending towards light while roots
respond by bending away from it. How does this help
the plant?
Plants show tropism in response to other stimuli as well. The roots
of a plant always grow downwards while the shoots usually grow
upwards and away from the earth. This upward and downward growth
of shoots and roots, respectively, in response to the pull of earth or gravity
is, obviously, geotropism (Fig. 6.6). If ‘hydro’ means water and ‘chemo’
refers to chemicals, what would ‘hydrotropism’ and ‘chemotropism’
mean? Can we think of examples of these kinds of directional growth
movements? One example of chemotropism is the growth of pollen tubes
towards ovules, about which we will learn more when we examine the
reproductive processes of living organisms.
Let us now once again think about how information is communicated
in the bodies of multicellular organisms. The movement of the
sensitive plant in response to touch is very quick. The movement of
sunflowers in response to day or night, on the other hand, is quite slow.
Growth-r elated movement of plants will be even slower .
Even in animal bodies, there are carefully controlled directions to
growth. Our arms and fingers grow in certain directions, not haphazardly.
So controlled movements can be either slow or fast. If fast responses to
stimuli are to be made, information transfer must happen very quickly.
For this, the medium of transmission must be able to move rapidly.Activity 6.2Activity 6.2Activity 6.2Activity 6.2Activity 6.2
Fill a conical flask with water .
Cover the neck of the flask with a wire mesh.
Keep two or three freshly germinated bean
seeds on the wire mesh.
Take a cardboard box which is open from one
side.
Keep the flask in the box in such a manner
that the open side of the box faces light coming
from a window (Fig. 6.5).
After two or three days, you will notice that
the shoots bend towards light and roots away
from light.
Now turn the flask so that the shoots are away
from light and the roots towards light. Leave it
undisturbed in this condition for a few days.
Have the old parts of the shoot and root
changed direction?
Are there differences in the direction of the new
growth?
What can we conclude from this activity?
Figure 6.5Figure 6.5Figure 6.5Figure 6.5Figure 6.5
Response of the plant to the direction of light
Figure 6.6 Figure 6.6 Figure 6.6 Figure 6.6 Figure 6.6 Plant showing geotropism
Reprint 2025-26
Science 108Electrical impulses are an excellent means for this. But there are
limitations to the use of electrical impulses. Firstly, they will reach only
those cells that are connected by nervous tissue, not each and every cell
in the animal body. Secondly, once an electrical impulse is generated in
a cell and transmitted, the cell will take some time to reset its mechanisms
before it can generate and transmit a new impulse. In other words, cells
cannot continually create and transmit electrical impulses. It is thus no
wonder that most multicellular organisms use another means of
communication between cells, namely, chemical communication.
If, instead of generating an electrical impulse, stimulated cells release
a chemical compound, this compound would diffuse all around the
original cell. If other cells around have the means to detect this compound
using special molecules on their surfaces, then they would be able to
recognise infor mation, and even transmit it. This will be slower , of course,
but it can potentially reach all cells of the body, regardless of nervous
connections, and it can be done steadily and persistently. These
compounds, or hormones used by multicellular organisms for control
and coordination show a great deal of diversity, as we would expect.
Different plant hormones help to coordinate growth, development and
responses to the environment. They are synthesised at places away from
where they act and simply diffuse to the area of action.
Let us take an example that we have worked with earlier [Activity 6.2].
When growing plants detect light, a hormone called auxin, synthesised
at the shoot tip, helps the cells to gr ow longer . When light is coming fr om
one side of the plant, auxin diffuses towards the shady side of the shoot.
This concentration of auxin stimulates the cells to grow longer on the
side of the shoot which is away from light. Thus, the plant appears to
bend towards light.
Another example of plant hormones are gibberellins which, like
auxins, help in the growth of the stem. Cytokinins promote cell division,
and it is natural then that they are present in greater concentration in
areas of rapid cell division, such as in fruits and seeds. These are examples
of plant hormones that help in promoting growth. But plants also need
signals to stop growing. Abscisic acid is one example of a hormone which
inhibits growth. Its effects include wilting of leaves.
QUESTIONS
?1. What are plant hormones?
2. How is the movement of leaves of the sensitive plant different from the
movement of a shoot towards light?
3. Give an example of a plant hormone that promotes growth.
4. How do auxins promote the growth of a tendril around a support?
5. Design an experiment to demonstrate hydrotropism.
Reprint 2025-26
Control and Coordination 1096.3 HORMONES IN ANIMALS6.3 HORMONES IN ANIMALS6.3 HORMONES IN ANIMALS6.3 HORMONES IN ANIMALS6.3 HORMONES IN ANIMALS
How are such chemical, or hormonal, means of information transmission
used in animals? What do some animals, for instance squirrels,
experience when they are in a scary situation? Their bodies have to
prepare for either fighting or running away. Both are very complicated
activities that will use a great deal of energy in controlled ways. Many
different tissue types will be used and their activities integrated together
in these actions. However , the two alter nate activities, fighting or running,
are also quite different! So here is a situation in which some common
preparations can be usefully made in the body. These preparations
should ideally make it easier to do either activity in the near future. How
would this be achieved?
If the body design in the squirrel relied only on electrical impulses
via nerve cells, the range of tissues instructed to prepare for the coming
activity would be limited. On the other hand, if a chemical signal were to
be sent as well, it would reach all cells of the body and provide the wide-
ranging changes needed. This is done in many animals, including human
beings, using a hormone called adrenaline that is secreted from the
adrenal glands. Look at Fig. 6.7 to locate these glands.
Adrenaline is secreted directly into the blood and carried to different
parts of the body. The target organs or the specific tissues on which it
acts include the heart. As a r esult, the heart beats faster , resulting in
supply of more oxygen to our muscles. The blood to the digestive system
and skin is reduced due to contraction of muscles around small arteries
in these organs. This diverts the blood to our skeletal muscles. The
breathing rate also increases because of the contractions of the
diaphragm and the rib muscles. All these responses together enable the
animal body to be ready to deal with the situation. Such animal hormones
are part of the endocrine system which constitutes a second way of control
and coordination in our body.
Activity 6.3Activity 6.3Activity 6.3Activity 6.3Activity 6.3
Look at Fig. 6.7.
Identify the endocrine glands mentioned in the figure.
Some of these glands have been listed in Table 6.1 and discussed
in the text. Consult books in the library and discuss with your
teachers to find out about other glands.
Remember that plants have hormones that control their directional
growth. What functions do animal hormones perform? On the face of it,
we cannot imagine their r ole in dir ectional gr owth. W e have never seen
an animal gr owing mor e in one dir ection or the other , depending on
light or gravity! But if we think about it a bit more, it will become evident
that, even in animal bodies, growth happens in carefully controlled places.
Plants will grow leaves in many places on the plant body, for example.
But we do not grow fingers on our faces. The design of the body is carefully
maintained even during the growth of children.
Reprint 2025-26
Science 110Let us examine some examples to understand how hormones help
in coordinated growth. We have all seen salt packets which say ‘iodised
salt’ or ‘enriched with iodine’. Why is it important for us to have iodised
salt in our diet? Iodine is necessary for the thyroid gland to make
thyroxin hormone. Thyroxin regulates carbohydrate, protein and fat
metabolism in the body so as to provide the best balance for growth.
Iodine is essential for the synthesis of thyroxin. In case iodine is deficient
in our diet, there is a possibility that we might suffer from goitre. One
of the symptoms in this disease is a swollen neck. Can you correlate
this with the position of the thyroid gland in Fig. 6.7?
Sometimes we come across people who are either very short (dwarfs)
or extremely tall (giants). Have you ever wondered how this happens?
Growth hormone is one of the hormones secreted by the pituitary. As
its name indicates, growth hormone regulates growth and development
of the body. If there is a deficiency of this hormone in childhood, it
leads to dwarfism.
You must have noticed many dramatic changes in your appearance
as well as that of your friends as you approached 10–12 years of age.
These changes associated with puberty are because of the secretion of
testosterone in males and oestrogen in females.
Do you know anyone in your family or friends who has been advised
by the doctor to take less sugar in their diet because they are suffering
from diabetes? As a treatment, they might be taking injections of insulin.
This is a hormone which is produced by the pancreas and helps in
regulating blood sugar levels. If it is not secreted in proper amounts,
the sugar level in the blood rises causing many harmful effects.Figure 6.7 Endocrine glands in human beings (a) male, (b) female(a) (b)Do You Know?
Hypothalamus plays
an important role in
the release of many
hormones. For
example, when the
level of growth
hormone is low, the
hypothalamus
releases growth
hormone releasing
factor which
stimulates the
pituitary gland to
release growth
hormone.
Reprint 2025-26
Control and Coordination 111If it is so important that hormones should be secreted in precise
quantities, we need a mechanism through which this is done. The timing
and amount of hormone released are regulated by feedback mechanisms.
For example, if the sugar levels in blood rise, they are detected by the
cells of the pancreas which respond by producing more insulin. As the
blood sugar level falls, insulin secretion is reduced.
Table 6.1 : Some important hormones and their functionsActivity 6.4Activity 6.4Activity 6.4Activity 6.4Activity 6.4
  Hormones are secreted by endocrine glands and have specific functions. Complete
Table 6.1 based on the hormone, the endocrine gland or the functions provided.
QUESTIONS
1. How does chemical coordination take place in animals?
2. Why is the use of iodised salt advisable?
3. How does our body respond when adrenaline is secreted into the blood?
4. Why are some patients of diabetes treated by giving injections of insulin?
What y ou hav e learnt?
Control and coordination are the functions of the nervous system and hormones
in our bodies.
The responses of the nervous system can be classified as reflex action, voluntary
action or involuntary action.
The nervous system uses electrical impulses to transmit messages.
The nervous system gets information from our sense organs and acts through our
muscles.
Chemical coordination is seen in both plants and animals.
Hormones produced in one part of an organism move to another part to achieve
the desired effect.
A feedback mechanism regulates the action of the hormones.S.No. Hormone Endocrine Gland Functions
1. Growth hormone Pituitary gland Stimulates growth in all organs
2. Thyroid gland Regulates metabolism for body growth
3. Insulin Regulates blood sugar level
4. Testosterone Testes
5. Ovaries Development of female sex organs,
regulates menstrual cycle, etc.
6. Adrenaline Adrenal gland
7. Releasing Stimulates pituitary gland to release
hormones hormones
Reprint 2025-26
Science 112EXERCISES
1.Which of the following is a plant hormone?
(a) Insulin
(b) Thyroxin
(c)Oestrogen
(d) Cytokinin.
2.The gap between two neurons is called a
(a)dendrite.
(b) synapse.
(c)axon.
(d) impulse.
3.The brain is responsible for
(a) thinking.
(b) regulating the heart beat.
(c)balancing the body.
(d) all of the above.
4.What is the function of receptors in our body? Think of situations where receptors
do not work properly. What problems are likely to arise?
5.Draw the structure of a neuron and explain its function.
6.How does phototropism occur in plants?
7.Which signals will get disrupted in case of a spinal cord injury?
8.How does chemical coordination occur in plants?
9.What is the need for a system of control and coordination in an organism?
10.How are involuntary actions and reflex actions different from each other?
11.Compare and contrast nervous and hormonal mechanisms for control and
coordination in animals.
12.What is the difference between the manner in which movement takes place in a
sensitive plant and the movement in our legs?
Reprint 2025-26
Science 208Activity 13.1Activity 13.1Activity 13.1Activity 13.1Activity 13.1Our Environment13 CHAPTER
We have hear d the wor d ‘envir onment’ often being used on the
television, in newspapers and by people around us. Our elders tell
us that the ‘environment’ is not what it used to be earlier; others say that
we should work in a healthy ‘environment’; and global summits involving
the developed and developing countries are regularly held to discuss
‘envir onmental’ issues. In this chapter , we shall be studying how various
components in the environment interact with each other and how we
impact the environment.
13.1 ECO 13.1 ECO13.1 ECO13.1 ECO13.1 ECO -SYSTEM — WHA-SYSTEM — WHA-SYSTEM — WHA-SYSTEM — WHA-SYSTEM — WHA T ARE ITS COMPONENTS?T ARE ITS COMPONENTS?T ARE ITS COMPONENTS?T ARE ITS COMPONENTS?T ARE ITS COMPONENTS?
All organisms such as plants, animals, microorganisms and human
beings as well as the physical surroundings interact with each other
and maintain a balance in nature. All the interacting organisms in an
area together with the non-living constituents of the environment form
an ecosystem. Thus, an ecosystem consists of biotic components
comprising living organisms and abiotic components comprising
physical factors like temperature, rainfall, wind, soil and minerals.
For example, if you visit a garden you will find different plants, such
as grasses, trees; flower bearing plants like rose, jasmine, sunflower;
and animals like frogs, insects and birds. All these living organisms
interact with each other and their growth, reproduction and other
activities are affected by the abiotic components of ecosystem. So a garden
is an ecosystem. Other types of ecosystems are forests, ponds and lakes.
These are natural ecosystems while gardens and crop-fields are human-
made (artificial) ecosystems.
You might have seen an aquarium. Let us try to design one.
What are the things that we need to keep in mind when we create
an aquarium? The fish would need a free space for swimming (it
could be a lar ge jar), water , oxygen and food.
We can pr ovide oxygen thr ough an oxygen pump (aerator) and
fish food which is available in the market.
Reprint 2025-26
Our Environment 209If we add a few aquatic plants and animals it can become a self-
sustaining system. Can you think how this happens? An aquarium
is an example of a human-made ecosystem.
Can we leave the aquarium as such after we set it up? Why does
it have to be cleaned once in a while? Do we have to clean ponds
or lakes in the same manner? Why or why not?
We have seen in earlier classes that or ganisms can be gr ouped as
producers, consumers and decomposers according to the manner in
which they obtain their sustenance from the environment. Let us recall
what we have learnt through the self sustaining ecosystem created by
us above. Which organisms can make organic compounds like sugar
and starch from inorganic substances using the radiant energy of the
Sun in the presence of chlorophyll? All green plants and certain bacteria
which can produce food by photosynthesis come under this category
and are called the producers.
Organisms depend on the producers either directly or indirectly for
their sustenance? These organisms which consume the food produced,
either directly from producers or indirectly by feeding on other consumers
are the consumers. Consumers can be classed variously as herbivores,
carnivores, omnivores and parasites. Can you give examples for each of
these categories of consumers?
Imagine the situation where you do not clean the  aquarium and
some fish and plants have died. Have you ever thought what
happens when an organism dies? The microorganisms, comprising
bacteria and fungi, break-down the dead remains and waste
products of organisms. These microorganisms are the decomposers
as they break-down the complex organic substances into simple
inorganic substances that go into the soil and are used up once
more by the plants. What will happen to the garbage, and dead
animals and plants in their absence? Will the natural replenishment
of the soil take place, even if decomposers are not there?
Activity 13.2Activity 13.2Activity 13.2Activity 13.2Activity 13.2
While creating an aquarium did you take care not to put an aquatic
animal which would eat others? What would have happened
otherwise?
Make groups and discuss how each of the above groups of
organisms ar e dependent on each other .
Write the aquatic or ganisms in or der of who eats whom and for m
a chain of at least three steps.  →  → Would you consider any one gr oup of or ganisms to be of primary
importance? Why or why not?
Reprint 2025-26
Science 210Figure 13.2Figure 13.2Figure 13.2Figure 13.2Figure 13.2
Trophic levels13.1.1 F ood Chains and W ebs
In Activity 13.4 we have formed a series of organisms feeding
on one another . This series or or ganisms taking part at
various biotic levels form a food chain (Fig. 13.1).
Each step or level of the food chain forms a trophic level.
The autotrophs or the producers are at the first trophic level.
They fix up the solar energy and make it available for
heterotrophs or the consumers. The herbivores or the primary
consumers come at the second, small carnivores or the
secondary consumers at the third and larger carnivores or
the tertiary consumers form the fourth trophic level (Fig. 13.2).
We know that the food we eat acts as a fuel to pr ovide us
energy to do work. Thus the interactions among various
components of the environment involves flow of energy from
one component of the system to another . As we have studied,
the autotrophs capture the energy present in sunlight and
convert it into chemical energy. This energy supports all the
activities of the living world. From autotrophs, the energy goes
to the heter otrophs and decomposers. However , as we saw in
the previous Chapter on ‘Sources of Energy’, when one form
of ener gy is changed to another , some ener gy is lost to the
environment in forms which cannot be used again. The flow
of energy between various components of the environment
has been extensively studied and it has been found that –
The green plants in a terrestrial ecosystem capture about
1% of the energy of sunlight that falls on their leaves and convert it
into food energy.
When green plants are eaten by primary consumers, a great deal
of energy is lost as heat to the environment, some amount goes
into digestion and in doing work and the rest goes towards growth
and reproduction. An average of 10% of the food eaten is turned
into its own body and made available for the next level of
consumers.
Therefore, 10% can be taken as the average value for the amount
of organic matter that is present at each step and reaches the next
level of consumers.
Since so little energy is available for the next level of consumers,
food chains generally consist of only three or four steps. The loss
of energy at each step is so great that very little usable energy
remains after four trophic levels.
There are generally a greater number of individuals at the lower
trophic levels of an ecosystem, the greatest number is of the
producers.
The length and complexity of food chains vary greatly. Each organism
is generally eaten by two or more other kinds of organisms which in
turn are eaten by several other organisms. So instead of a straight
line food chain, the relationship can be shown as a series of branching
lines called a food web (Fig. 13.3).Figure 13.1Figure 13.1Figure 13.1Figure 13.1Figure 13.1
Food chain in nature
(a) in forest, (b) in
grassland and (c) in a
pond
Reprint 2025-26
Our Environment 211From the energy flow diagram (Fig. 13.4),
two things become clear . Firstly, the flow of
energy is unidirectional. The energy that is
captured by the autotrophs does not revert
back to the solar input and the energy which
passes to the herbivores does not come back
to autotrophs. As it moves progressively
through the various trophic levels it is no
longer available to the previous level.
Secondly, the energy available at each trophic
level gets diminished progressively due to loss
of energy at each level.
Another interesting aspect of food chain
is how unknowingly some harmful
chemicals enter our bodies through the food
chain. Y ou have r ead in Class IX how water
gets polluted. One of the reasons is the use of
several pesticides and other chemicals to
protect our crops from diseases and pests.
These chemicals are either washed down into
the soil or into the water bodies. From the
soil, these are absorbed by the plants along
with water and minerals, and from the water
bodies these are taken up by aquatic plants
Figure 13.4  Figure 13.4  Figure 13.4  Figure 13.4  Figure 13.4  Diagram showing flow of energy in an ecosystemFigure 13.3Figure 13.3Figure 13.3Figure 13.3Figure 13.3
Food web, consisting of
many food chains
Reprint 2025-26
Science 212Activity 13.3Activity 13.3Activity 13.3Activity 13.3Activity 13.3and animals. This is one of the ways in which they enter the food chain.
As these chemicals are not degradable, these get accumulated
progressively at each trophic level. As human beings occupy the top
level in any food chain, the maximum concentration of these chemicals
get accumulated in our bodies. This phenomenon is known as biological
magnification. This is the reason why our food grains such as wheat
and rice, vegetables and fruits, and even meat, contain varying amounts
of pesticide residues. They cannot always be removed by washing or
other means.
QUESTIONS
?1. What are trophic levels? Give an example of a food chain and state the
different trophic levels in it.
2. What is the role of decomposers in the ecosystem?
13.2 13.213.213.213.2 HOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THEHOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THEHOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THEHOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THEHOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THE
ENVIRONMENT?ENVIRONMENT?ENVIRONMENT?ENVIRONMENT?ENVIRONMENT?
We are an integral part of the envir onment. Changes in the envir onment
affect us and our activities change the envir onment ar ound us. W e have
already seen in Class IX how our activities pollute the environment. In
this chapter , we shall be looking at two of the envir onmental pr oblems
in detail, that is, depletion of the ozone layer and waste disposal.
13.2.1 Ozone Layer and How it is Getting Depleted
Ozone (O3) is a molecule formed by three atoms of oxygen. While O2,
which we normally refer to as oxygen, is essential for all aerobic forms of
life. Ozone, is a deadly poison. However , at the higher levels of the
atmosphere, ozone performs an essential function. It shields the surface
of the earth from ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the Sun. This radiationNewspaper reports about pesticide levels in ready-made food items
are often seen these days and some states have banned these
products. Debate in groups the need for such bans.
What do you think would be the source of pesticides in these food
items? Could pesticides get into our bodies from this source through
other food products too?
Discuss what methods could be applied to reduce our intake of
pesticides.
Reprint 2025-26
Our Environment 213Activity 13.5Activity 13.5Activity 13.5Activity 13.5Activity 13.5Activity 13.4Activity 13.4Activity 13.4Activity 13.4Activity 13.4is highly damaging to organisms, for example, it is known to cause skin
cancer in human beings.
Ozone at the higher levels of the atmosphere is a product of UV
radiation acting on oxygen (O2) molecule. The higher energy UV
radiations split apart some moleculer oxygen (O2) into free oxygen (O)
atoms. These atoms then combine with the molecular oxygen to form
ozone as shown—OO + O2UV⎯→ ⎯⎯OO O23Ozone)+→(The amount of ozone in the atmosphere began to drop sharply in
the 1980s. This decrease has been linked to synthetic chemicals like
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) which are used as refrigerants and in fire
extinguishers. In 1987, the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) succeeded in forging an agreement to freeze CFC production at
1986 levels. It is now mandatory for all the manufacturing companies
to make CFC-free refrigerators throughout the world.
Collect waste material from your homes. This could include all
the waste generated during a day, like kitchen waste (spoilt food,
vegetable peels, used tea leaves, milk packets and empty cartons),
waste paper , empty medicine bottles/strips/bubble packs, old and
torn clothes and br oken footwear .
Bury this material in a pit in the school garden or if there is no
space available, you can collect the material in an old bucket/
flower pot and cover with at least 15 cm of soil.
Keep this material moist and observe at 15-day intervals.
What are the materials that remain unchanged over long periods
of time?
What are the materials which change their form and structure
over time?
Of these materials that are changed, which ones change the fastest?Find out from the library, internet or newspaper reports, which
chemicals ar e responsible for the depletion of the ozone layer .
Find out if the regulations put in place to control the emission of
these chemicals have succeeded in reducing the damage to the
ozone layer . Has the size of the hole in the ozone layer changed in
recent years?
13.2.2 Managing the Garbage we Produce
In our daily activities, we generate a lot of material that are thrown
away. What are some of these waste materials? What happens after we
throw them away? Let us perform an activity to find answers to these
questions.
Reprint 2025-26
Science 214We have seen in the chapter on ‘Life Pr ocesses’ that the food we eat is
digested by various enzymes in our body. Have you ever wondered why
the same enzyme does not break-down everything we eat? Enzymes are
specific in their action, specific enzymes are needed for the break-down
of a particular substance. That is why we will not get any energy if we
try to eat coal! Because of this, many human-made materials like plastics
will not be broken down by the action of bacteria or other saprophytes.
These materials will be acted upon by physical processes like heat and
pressure, but under the ambient conditions found in our environment,
these persist for a long time.
Substances that are broken down by biological processes are said
to be biodegradable. How many of the substances you buried were
biodegradable? Substances that are not broken down in this manner
are said to be non-biodegradable. These substances may be inert and
simply persist in the environment for a long time or may harm the various
members of the eco-system.
Activity 13.6Activity 13.6Activity 13.6Activity 13.6Activity 13.6
Use the library or internet to find out more about biodegradable
and non-biodegradable substances.
How long are various non-biodegradable substances expected to
last in our environment?
These days, new types of plastics which are said to be biodegradable
are available. Find out more about such materials and whether
they do or do not harm the environment.
1. Why are some substances biodegradable and some non-biodegradable?
2. Give any two ways in which biodegradable substances would affect the
environment.
3. Give any two ways in which non-biodegradable substances would affect
the environment.QUESTIONS
?
Visit any town or city, and we are sure to find heaps of garbage all over
the place. Visit any place of tourist interest and we are sure to find the
place littered with empty food wrappers. In the earlier classes we have
talked about this problem of dealing with the garbage that we generate. Let
us now look at the problem a bit more deeply.
Reprint 2025-26
Our Environment 215Activity 13.7Activity 13.7Activity 13.7Activity 13.7Activity 13.7
Find out what happens to the waste generated at home. Is there a
system in place to collect this waste?
Find out how the local body ( panchayat , municipal corporation,
resident welfare association) deals with the waste. Are there
mechanisms in place to treat the biodegradable and non-
biodegradable wastes separately?
Calculate how much waste is generated at home in a day.
How much of this waste is biodegradable?
Calculate how much waste is generated in the classroom
in a day.
How much of this waste is biodegradable?
Suggest ways of dealing with this waste.
Improvements in our life-style have resulted in greater amounts of
waste material generation. Changes in attitude also have a role to play,
with more and more things we use becoming disposable. Changes in
packaging have resulted in much of our waste becoming non-
biodegradable. What do you think will be the impact of these on our
environment?Activity 13.8Activity 13.8Activity 13.8Activity 13.8Activity 13.8
Find out how the sewage in your locality is treated. Are there
mechanisms in place to ensure that local water bodies are not
polluted by untreated sewage.
Find out how the local industries in your locality treat their wastes.
Are there mechanisms in place to ensure that the soil and water
are not polluted by this waste?
Disposable cups in trains
If you ask your parents, they will probably remember a time when tea in trains was
served in plastic glasses which had to be r eturned to the vendor . The intr oduction of
disposable cups was hailed as a step forward for reasons of hygiene. No one at that time
perhaps thought about the impact caused by the disposal of millions of these cups on a
daily basis. Some time back, kulhads , that is, disposable cups made of clay, were
suggested as an alternative. But a little thought showed that making these kulhads  on
a large scale would r esult in the loss of the fertile top-soil. Now disposable paper -cups
are being used. What do you think ar e the advantages of disposable paper -cups over
disposable plastic cups?Think it over
Reprint 2025-26
Science 216Activity 13.9Activity 13.9Activity 13.9Activity 13.9Activity 13.9
Search the internet or library to find out what hazardous materials
have to be dealt with while disposing of electronic items. How would
these materials affect the environment?
Find out how plastics are recycled. Does the recycling process
have any impact on the environment?
QUESTIONS
?1. What is ozone and how does it affect any ecosystem?
2. How can you help in reducing the problem of waste disposal? Give
any two methods.
What y ou hav e learnt
The various components of an ecosystem are interdependent.
The producers make the energy from sunlight available to the rest of the ecosystem.
There is a loss of energy as we go from one trophic level to the next, this limits the
number of trophic levels in a food-chain.
Human activities have an impact on the environment.
The use of chemicals like CFCs has endanger ed the ozone layer . Since the ozone
layer protects against the ultraviolet radiation from the Sun, this could damage
the environment.
The waste we generate may be biodegradable or non-biodegradable.
The disposal of the waste we generate is causing serious environmental problems.
EXERCISES
1.Which of the following groups contain only biodegradable items?
(a) Grass, flowers and leather
(b) Grass, wood and plastic
(c)Fruit-peels, cake and lime-juice
(d) Cake, wood and grass
2.Which of the following constitute a food-chain?
(a) Grass, wheat and mango
(b) Grass, goat and human
Reprint 2025-26
Our Environment 217(c)Goat, cow and elephant
(d) Grass, fish and goat
3.Which of the following are environment-friendly practices?
(a) Carrying cloth-bags to put purchases in while shopping
(b) Switching off unnecessary lights and fans
(c) Walking to school instead of getting your mother to dr op you on her scooter
(d) All of the above
4.What will happen if we kill all the organisms in one trophic level?
5.Will the impact of removing all the organisms in a trophic level be different for
different trophic levels? Can the organisms of any trophic level be removed without
causing any damage to the ecosystem?
6.What is biological magnification? Will the levels of this magnification be different at
different levels of the ecosystem?
7.What are the problems caused by the non-biodegradable wastes that we generate?
8.If all the waste we generate is biodegradable, will this have no impact on the
environment?
9.Why is damage to the ozone layer a cause for concern? What steps are being taken
to limit this damage?
Reprint 2025-26
The Human Eye and
the Colourful World10 CHAPTER
You have studied in the pr evious chapter about r efraction of light by
lenses. Y ou also studied the natur e, position and r elative size of
images formed by lenses. How can these ideas help us in the study of
the human eye? The human eye uses light and enables us to see objects
around us. It has a lens in its structure.  What is the function of the lens
in a human eye? How do the lenses used in spectacles correct defects of
vision? Let us consider these questions in this chapter .
We have lear nt in the pr evious chapter about light and some of its
properties. In this chapter , we shall use these ideas to study some of the
optical phenomena in natur e. We shall also discuss about rainbow
formation, splitting of white light and blue colour of the sky.
10.1 THE HUMAN EYE
The human eye is one of the most valuable and sensitive sense organs.
It enables us to see the wonderful world and the colours around us. On
closing the eyes, we can identify objects to some extent by their smell,
taste, sound they make or by touch. It is, however , impossible to identify
colours while closing the eyes. Thus, of all the sense organs, the human
eye is the most significant one as it enables us to see the beautiful,
colourful world around us.
The h uman eye is like a camera.  Its lens
system forms an image on a light-sensitive
screen called the retina. Light enters the eye
through a thin membrane called the cornea.
It forms the transparent bulge on the front
surface of the eyeball as shown in Fig. 10.1.
The eyeball is approximately spherical in shape
with a diameter of about 2.3 cm. Most of the
refraction for the light rays entering the eye
occurs at the outer surface of the cornea. The
crystalline lens merely provides the finer
adjustment of focal length required to focus
objects at dif ferent distances on the r etina. W e find a structur e called iris
behind the cornea. Iris is a dark muscular diaphragm that controls the
size of the pupil.  The pupil regulates and controls the amount of light
Figure 10.1Figure 10.1Figure 10.1Figure 10.1Figure 10.1
The human eye
Reprint 2025-26
Science 162entering the eye. The eye lens forms an inverted real image of the object
on the retina. The retina is a delicate membrane having enormous
number of light-sensitive cells.  The light-sensitive cells get activated
upon illumination and generate electrical signals.  These signals are
sent to the brain via the optic nerves.  The brain interprets these signals,
and finally, processes the information so that we perceive objects as
they are.
10.1.1 Power of Accommodation
The eye lens is composed of a fibrous, jelly-like material. Its curvature
can be modified to some extent by the ciliary muscles. The change in the
curvature of the eye lens can thus change its focal length. When the
muscles are relaxed, the lens becomes thin. Thus, its focal length
increases.  This enables us to see distant objects clearly. When you are
looking at objects closer to the eye, the ciliary muscles contract. This
increases the curvatur e of the eye lens. The eye lens then becomes thicker .
Consequently, the focal length of the eye lens decreases.  This enables
us to see nearby objects clearly.
The ability of the eye lens to adjust its focal length is called
accommodation.  However , the focal length of the eye lens cannot be
decreased below a certain minimum limit.  T ry to r ead a printed page by
holding it very close to your eyes. Y ou may see the image being blurr ed
or feel strain in the eye. To see an object comfortably and distinctly, you
must hold it at about 25 cm from the eyes.  The minimum distance, at
which objects can be seen most distinctly without strain, is called the
least distance of distinct vision. It is also called the near point of the eye.
For a young adult with normal vision, the near point is about
25 cm. The farthest point upto which the eye can see objects clearly is
called the far point of the eye. It is infinity for a nor mal eye. Y ou may note
here a normal eye can see objects clearly that are between 25 cm and
infinity.
Sometimes, the crystalline lens of people at old age becomes milky and
cloudy. This condition is called cataract. This causes partial or complete
loss of vision. It is possible to restore vision through a cataract surgery.
10.2 DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION10.2 DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION10.2 DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION10.2 DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION10.2 DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION
Sometimes, the eye may gradually lose its power of accommodation.
In such conditions, the person cannot see the objects distinctly and
comfortably. The vision becomes blurred due to the refractive defects
of the eye.
There are mainly three common refractive defects of vision. These
are (i) myopia or near -sightedness, (ii) Hyper metr opia or far -
sightedness, and (iii) Presbyopia.  These defects can be corrected by
the use of suitable spherical lenses. W e discuss below these defects
and their correction.
Reprint 2025-26
The Human Eye and the Colour ful W orld 163(a)Myopia
Myopia is also known as near -
sightedness. A person with myopia
can see nearby objects clearly but
cannot see distant objects distinctly.
A person with this defect has the far
point nearer than infinity. Such a
person may see clearly upto a
distance of a few metres. In a myopic
eye, the image of a distant object is
formed in front of the retina [Fig.
10.2 (b)] and not at the retina itself.
This defect may arise due to (i)
excessive curvature of the eye lens,
or (ii) elongation of the eyeball. This
defect can be corrected by using a
concave lens of suitable power . This
is illustrated in Fig. 10.2 (c). A
concave lens of suitable power will
bring the image back on to the
retina and thus the defect is corrected.
(b)Hypermetropia
Hyper metropia is also known as far -sightedness.
A person with hypermetropia can see distant
objects clearly but cannot see nearby objects
distinctly. The near point, for the person, is farther
away from the normal near point (25 cm). Such a
person has to keep a reading material much
beyond 25 cm from the eye for comfortable
reading. This is because the light rays from a
closeby object are focussed at a point behind the
retina as shown in Fig. 10.3 (b). This defect arises
either because (i) the focal length of the eye lens is
too long, or (ii) the eyeball has become too small.
This defect can be corrected by using a convex
lens of appr opriate power . This is illustrated in
Fig. 10.3 (c). Eye-glasses with converging lenses
provide the additional focussing power required
for forming the image on the retina.
(c)   Presbyopia
The power of accommodation of the eye usually
decreases with ageing. For most people, the near
point gradually recedes away. They find it difficult
to see nearby objects comfortably and distinctly
without corrective eye-glasses.  This defect is
called Presbyopia.  It arises due to the gradualFigure 10.2Figure 10.2Figure 10.2Figure 10.2Figure 10.2
(a), (b) The myopic eye, and (c) correction for myopia with a
concave lens
Figure 10.3Figure 10.3Figure 10.3Figure 10.3Figure 10.3
(a), (b) The hypermetropic eye, and (c)
correction for hypermetropia
N = Near point of a
      hypermetropic eye.
N’ = Near point of a
      normal eye.
Reprint 2025-26
Science 164Think it over
You talk of wondr ous things you see,
You say the sun shines bright;
I feel him warm, but how can he
Or make it day or night ?
 – C. CIBBER
Do you know that our eyes can live even after our death? By donating our eyes after we
die, we can light the life of a blind person.
About 35 million people in the developing world are blind and most of them can be
cured. About 4.5 million people with corneal blindness can be cured through corneal
transplantation of donated eyes. Out of these 4.5 million, 60% are children below the
age of 12. So, if we have got the gift of vision, why not pass it on to somebody who does
not have it? What do we have to keep in mind when eyes have to be donated?
Eye donors can belong to any age group or sex. People who use spectacles, or those
operated for cataract, can still donate the eyes. People who are diabetic, have
hypertension, asthma patients and those without communicable diseases can also
donate eyes.weakening of the ciliary muscles and diminishing flexibility of the
eye lens.  Sometimes, a person may suffer from both myopia and
hypermetropia.  Such people often require bi-focal lenses. A common
type of bi-focal lenses consists of both concave and convex lenses.
The upper portion consists of a concave lens. It facilitates distant
vision. The lower part is a convex lens.  It facilitates near vision.
  These days, it is possible to correct the refractive defects with
contact lenses or through surgical interventions.
QUESTIONS
?1. What is meant by power of accommodation of the eye?
2. A person with a myopic eye cannot see objects beyond 1.2 m distinctly.
What should be the type of the corrective lens used to restore proper
vision?
3. What is the far point and near point of the human eye with normal
vision?
4. A student has difficulty reading the blackboard while sitting in the last
row. What could be the defect the child is suffering from? How can it be
corrected?
Reprint 2025-26
The Human Eye and the Colour ful W orld 16510.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISM10.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISM10.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISM10.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISM10.3 REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISM
You have lear nt how light gets r efracted thr ough a r ectangular glass
slab. For parallel refracting surfaces, as in a glass slab, the emergent ray
is parallel to the incident ray.  However , it is slightly displaced laterally.
How would light get refracted through a transparent prism? Consider a
triangular glass prism. It has two triangular bases and three rectangular
lateral sur faces. These sur faces ar e inclined to each other . The angle
between its two lateral faces is called the angle of the prism. Let us now
do an activity to study the refraction of light through a triangular glass
prism.Eyes must be removed within 4-6 hours after death. Inform the nearest eye bank
immediately.
The eye bank team will remove the eyes at the home of the deceased or at a hospital.
Eye removal takes only 10-15 minutes. It is a simple process and does not lead to
any disfigurement.
Persons who were infected with or died because of AIDS, Hepatitis B or C, rabies,
acute leukaemia, tetanus, cholera, meningitis or encephalitis cannot donate eyes.
An eye bank collects, evaluates and distributes the donated eyes. All eyes donated are
evaluated using strict medical standards. Those donated eyes found unsuitable for
transplantation are used for valuable research and medical education. The identities
of both the donor and the recipient remain confidential.
One pair of eyes gives vision to up to FOUR CORNEAL BLIND PEOPLE.
Activity 10.1Activity 10.1Activity 10.1Activity 10.1Activity 10.1
Fix a sheet of white paper on a drawing board using drawing pins.
Place a glass prism on it in such a way that it rests on its triangular
base. Trace the outline of the prism using a pencil.
Draw a straight line PE inclined to one of the refracting surfaces,
say AB, of the prism.
Fix two pins, say at points P and Q, on the line PE as shown in
Fig. 10.4.
Look for the images of the pins, fixed at P and Q, through the
other face AC.
Fix two more pins, at points R and S, such that the pins at R and
S and the images of the pins at P and Q lie on the same straight
line.
Remove the pins and the glass prism.
The line PE meets the boundary of the prism at point E
(see Fig. 10.4). Similarly, join and produce the points R and S.  Let
these lines meet the boundary of the prism at E and F , respectively.
Join E and F .
Draw perpendiculars to the refracting surfaces AB and AC of the
prism at points E and F , respectively.
Mark the angle of incidence ( ∠i), the angle of refraction ( ∠r) and
the angle of emergence ( ∠e) as shown in Fig. 10.4.
Reprint 2025-26
Science 166Activity 10.2Activity 10.2Activity 10.2Activity 10.2Activity 10.2
Take a thick sheet of cardboard and make a small hole or narrow
slit in its middle.
Allow sunlight to fall on the narrow slit. This gives a narrow beam
of white light.
Now, take a glass prism and allow the light from the slit to fall on
one of its faces as shown in Fig. 10.5.
Turn the prism slowly until the light that comes out of it appears
on a nearby screen.
What do you observe? Y ou will find a beautiful band of colours.
Why does this happen?Here PE is the incident ray, EF is the refracted ray and FS is the
emergent ray. Y ou may note that a ray of light is entering fr om air to
glass at the first surface AB. The light ray on refraction has bent towards
the normal. At the second surface AC, the light ray has entered from
glass to air . Hence it has bent away fr om nor mal. Compar e the angle of
incidence and the angle of refraction at each refracting surface of the
prism. Is this similar to the kind of bending that occurs in a glass slab?
The peculiar shape of the prism makes the emergent ray bend at an
angle to the direction of the incident ray. This angle is called the angle of
deviation. In this case ∠D is the angle of deviation. Mark the angle of
deviation in the above activity and measure it.
10.4 DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GL10.4 DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GL10.4 DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GL10.4 DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GL10.4 DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GL ASS PRISMASS PRISMASS PRISM ASS PRISMASS PRISM
You must have seen and appr eciated the spectacular colours in a rainbow.
How could the white light of the Sun give us various colours of the
rainbow? Before we take up this question, we shall first go back to the
refraction of light through a prism. The inclined refracting surfaces of a
glass prism show exciting phenomenon.  Let us find it out through an
activity.PE – Incident ray ∠i – Angle of incidence
EF – Refracted ray ∠r – Angle of refraction
FS – Emergent ray ∠e – Angle of emergence
∠A – Angle of the prism ∠D – Angle of deviation
Figure 10.4Figure 10.4Figure 10.4Figure 10.4Figure 10.4  Refraction of light through a triangular glass prism
Reprint 2025-26
The Human Eye and the Colour ful W orld 167The prism has probably split the incident
white light into a band of colours.  Note the
colours that appear at the two ends of the
colour band. What is the sequence of colours
that you see on the screen? The various
colours seen are Violet, Indigo, Blue, Green,
Yellow, Orange and Red, as shown in
Fig. 10.5. The acronym VIBGYOR will help
you to remember the sequence of colours.
The band of the coloured components of a
light beam is called its spectrum. Y ou might
not be able to see all the colours separately.
Yet something makes each colour distinct fr om the other . The splitting
of light into its component colours is called dispersion.
You have seen that white light is dispersed
into its seven-colour components by a prism.
Why do we get these colours? Different colours
of light bend through different angles with
respect to the incident ray, as they pass
through a prism. The red light bends the least
while the violet the most. Thus the rays of each
colour emerge along different paths and thus
become distinct. It is the band of distinct
colours that we see in a spectrum.
Isaac Newton was the first to use a glass prism to obtain
the spectrum of sunlight. He tried to split the colours of
the spectrum of white light further by using another similar
prism. However , he could not get any mor e colours. He
then placed a second identical prism in an inverted position
with respect to the first prism, as shown in Fig. 10.6. This
allowed all the colours of the spectrum to pass through
the second prism. He found a beam of white light emerging
from the other side of the second prism. This observation
gave Newton the idea that the sunlight is made up of seven
colours.
Any light that gives a spectrum similar to that of
sunlight is often referred to as white light.
A rainbow is a natural spectrum appearing in the sky
after a rain shower (Fig. 10.7). It is caused by dispersion
of sunlight by tiny water droplets, present in the
atmosphere. A rainbow is always formed in a direction
opposite to that of the Sun. The water droplets act like
small prisms. They refract and disperse the incident
sunlight, then reflect it internally, and finally refract it
again when it comes out of the raindrop (Fig. 10.8). Due
to the dispersion of light and internal reflection, different
colours reach the observer’s eye.
You can also see a rainbow on a sunny day when
you look at the sky through a waterfall or through a water
fountain, with the Sun behind you.Figure 10.5 Figure 10.5 Figure 10.5 Figure 10.5 Figure 10.5 Dispersion of white light by the glass prism
Figure 10.6 Figure 10.6 Figure 10.6 Figure 10.6 Figure 10.6 Recombination of the spectrum of
white light
Figure 10.7 Figure 10.7 Figure 10.7 Figure 10.7 Figure 10.7 Rainbow in the sky
Figure 10.8 Figure 10.8 Figure 10.8 Figure 10.8 Figure 10.8 Rainbow formationSunlightRaindrop
Reprint 2025-26
Science 168Figure 10.10Figure 10.10Figure 10.10Figure 10.10Figure 10.10
Atmospheric refraction
effects at sunrise and
sunset10.5     ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTION
You might have observed the appar ent random wavering or
flickering of objects seen through a turbulent stream of hot air
rising above a fir e or a radiator . The air just above the fir e becomes
hotter than the air further up. The hotter air is lighter (less dense)
than the cooler air above it, and has a refractive index slightly
less than that of the cooler air . Since the physical conditions of
the refracting medium (air) are not stationary, the apparent
position of the object, as seen thr ough the hot air , fluctuates.
This wavering is thus an effect of atmospheric refraction (refraction
of light by the earth’s atmosphere) on a small scale in our local
environment. The twinkling of stars is a similar phenomenon on
a much larger scale. Let us see how we can explain it.
Twinkling of stars
The twinkling of a star is due to atmospheric refraction of starlight. The
starlight, on entering the earth’s atmosphere, undergoes refraction
continuously before it reaches the earth. The atmospheric refraction
occurs in a medium of gradually changing refractive index. Since the
atmosphere bends starlight towards the normal, the apparent position
of the star is slightly different from its actual position. The star appears
slightly higher (above) than its actual position when viewed near the
horizon (Fig. 10.9). Further , this appar ent position of the star is not
stationary, but keeps on changing slightly, since the physical conditions
of the earth’s atmosphere are not stationary, as was the case in the
previous paragraph. Since the stars are very distant, they approximate
point-sized sources of light. As the path of rays of light coming from
the star goes on varying slightly, the apparent position of the star
fluctuates and the amount of starlight entering the eye flickers – the
star sometimes appears brighter , and at some other time, fainter , which
is the twinkling effect.
Why don’t the planets twinkle? The p lanets are much
closer to the earth, and are thus seen as extended sources.
If we consider a planet as a collection of a large number
of point-sized sources of light, the total variation in the
amount of light entering our eye from all the individual
point-sized sources will average out to zero, thereby
nullifying the twinkling effect.
Advance sunrise and delayed sunset
The Sun is visible to us about 2 minutes before the actual
sunrise, and about 2 minutes after the actual sunset
because of atmospheric refraction. By actual sunrise, we
mean the actual crossing of the horizon by the Sun. Fig.
10.10 shows the actual and apparent positions of the
Sun with respect to the horizon. The time difference
between actual sunset and the apparent sunset is about
2 minutes. The apparent flattening of the Sun’s disc at
sunrise and sunset is also due to the same phenomenon .Figure 10.9Figure 10.9Figure 10.9Figure 10.9Figure 10.9
Apparent star position
due to atmospheric
refraction
Reprint 2025-26
The Human Eye and the Colour ful W orld 16910.6  SC ATTERING OF LIGHT
The interplay of light with objects around us gives rise to several
spectacular phenomena in nature. The blue colour of the sky, colour of
water in deep sea, the reddening of the sun at sunrise and the sunset
are some of the wonderful phenomena we are familiar with. In the previous
class, you have learnt about the scattering of light by colloidal particles.
The path of a beam of light passing through a true solution is not visible.
However , its path becomes visible thr ough a colloidal solution wher e the
size of the particles is r elatively lar ger.
10.6.1 T yndall Effect
The earth’s atmosphere is a heterogeneous mixture of minute particles.
These particles include smoke, tiny water droplets, suspended particles
of dust and molecules of air . When a beam of light strikes such fine
particles, the path of the beam becomes visible. The light reaches us,
after being reflected diffusely by these particles. The phenomenon of
scattering of light by the colloidal particles gives rise to Tyndall effect
which you have studied in Class IX. This phenomenon is seen when a
fine beam of sunlight enters a smoke-filled room through a small hole.
Thus, scattering of light makes the particles visible. Tyndall effect can
also be observed when sunlight passes through a canopy of a dense
forest.  Here, tiny water droplets in the mist scatter light.
The colour of the scattered light depends on the size of the scattering
particles. V ery fine particles scatter mainly blue light while particles of
larger size scatter light of longer wavelengths.  If the size of the scattering
particles is large enough, then, the scattered light may even appear
white.
10.6.2 Why is the colour of the clear Sky Blue?
The molecules of air and other fine particles in the atmosphere have size
smaller than the wavelength of visible light. These are more effective in
scattering light of shorter wavelengths at the blue end than light of longer
wavelengths at the red end. The red light has a wavelength about 1.8
times greater than blue light. Thus, when sunlight passes through the
atmosphere, the fine particles in air scatter the blue colour (shorter
wavelengths) more strongly than red. The scattered blue light enters
our eyes. If the earth had no atmosphere, there would not have been
any scattering. Then, the sky would have looked dark.  The sky appears
dark to passengers flying at very high altitudes, as scattering is not
prominent at such heights.
You might have observed that ‘danger’ signal lights ar e red in colour .
Do you know why? The red is least scattered by fog or smoke.  Therefore,
it can be seen in the same colour at a distance.
Reprint 2025-26
Science 170What y ou hav e learnt
The ability of the eye to focus on both near and distant objects, by adjusting its
focal length, is called the accommodation of the eye.
The smallest distance, at which the eye can see objects clearly without strain, is
called the near point of the eye or the least distance of distinct vision.  For a young
adult with normal vision, it is about 25 cm.
The common refractive defects of vision include myopia, hypermetropia and
presbyopia. Myopia (short-sightedness – the image of distant objects is focussed
befor e the r etina) is corr ected by using a concave lens of suitable power .
Hyper metropia (far -sightedness – the image of nearby objects is focussed beyond
the retina) is corr ected by using a convex lens of suitable power . The eye loses its
power of accommodation at old age.
The splitting of white light into its component colours is called dispersion.
Scattering of light causes the blue colour of sky.
EXERCISES
1.The human eye can focus on objects at different distances by adjusting the focal
length of the eye lens. This is due to
 (a) presbyopia. (b) accommodation.
(c) near-sightedness. (d) far-sightedness.
2.The human eye forms the image of an object at  its
 (a)cornea. (b)  iris. (c)  pupil. (d)  retina.
3.The least distance of distinct vision for a young adult with normal vision is about
 (a)25 m. (b)  2.5 cm. (c)  25 cm. (d)  2.5 m.
4.The change in focal length of an eye lens is caused by the action of the
 (a)pupil. (b)  retina. (c)ciliary muscles. (d)  iris.
5.A person needs a lens of power –5.5 dioptres for correcting his distant vision. For
correcting his near vision he needs a lens of power +1.5 dioptre. What is the focal
length of the lens required for correcting (i) distant vision, and (ii) near vision?
6.The far point of a myopic person is 80 cm in front of the eye. What is the nature and
power of the lens required to correct the problem?
7.Make a diagram to show how hypermetropia is corrected. The near point of a
hypermetropic eye is 1 m. What is the power of the lens required to correct this
defect? Assume that the near point of the normal eye is 25 cm.
8.Why is a normal eye not able to see clearly the objects placed closer than 25 cm?
9.What happens to the image distance in the eye when we increase the distance of an
object from the eye?
10.Why do stars twinkle?
11.Explain why the planets do not twinkle.
12.Why does the sky appear dark instead of blue to an astronaut?
Reprint 2025-26
Science 128
Figure 8.1Figure 8.1Figure 8.1Figure 8.1Figure 8.1
Creation of diversity over succeeding
generations. The original organism at the top
will give rise to, say, two individuals, similar
in body design, but with subtle differences.
Each of them, in turn, will give rise to two
individuals in the next generation. Each of
the four individuals in the bottom row will
be dif ferent fr om each other . While some of
these differences will be unique, others will
be inherited from their respective parents,
who wer e different fr om each other .Heredity8 CHAPTER
We have seen that r eproductive pr ocesses give rise to new individuals
that ar e similar , but subtly dif ferent. W e have discussed how some
amount of variation is produced even during asexual reproduction. And
the number of successful variations are maximised by the process of
sexual reproduction. If we observe a field of sugarcane we find very little
variations among the individual plants. But in a number of animals
including human beings, which reproduce sexually, quite distinct
variations ar e visible among dif ferent individuals. In this chapter , we
shall be studying the mechanism by which variations are created and
inherited.
8.18.18.1 8.18.1AAAAACCUMUL CCUMULCCUMULCCUMULCCUMUL AAAAATION OF VTION OF VTION OF VTION OF VTION OF V ARIA ARIAARIA ARIAARIA TION TIONTION TIONTION
DURING REPRODUCTIONDURING REPRODUCTIONDURING REPRODUCTIONDURING REPRODUCTIONDURING REPRODUCTION
Inheritance from the previous generation provides
both a common basic body design, and subtle
changes in it, for the next generation. Now think
about what would happen when this new generation,
in its turn, reproduces. The second generation will
have differences that they inherit from the first
generation, as well as newly created differences
(Fig. 8.1).
Figure 8.1 would represent the situation if a
single individual reproduces, as happens in asexual
reproduction. If one bacterium divides, and then the
resultant two bacteria divide again, the four
individual bacteria generated would be very similar .
There would be only very minor differences between
them, generated due to small inaccuracies in DNA
copying. However , if sexual r eproduction is involved,
even greater diversity will be generated, as we will
see when we discuss the rules of inheritance.
Do all these variations in a species have equal
chances of surviving in the environment in which they
find themselves? Obviously not. Depending on the
nature of variations, different individuals would have
Reprint 2025-26
Heredity 1298.2 HEREDITY8.2 HEREDITY8.2 HEREDITY8.2 HEREDITY8.2 HEREDITY
The most obvious outcome of the reproductive process still remains the
generation of individuals of similar design. The rules of heredity determine
the process by which traits and characteristics are reliably inherited. Let
us take a closer look at these rules.
8.2.1 Inherited T raits
What exactly do we mean by similarities and dif ferences? W e know that
a child bears all the basic featur es of a human being. However , it does
not look exactly like its parents, and human populations show a great
deal of variation.QUESTIONS
?1. If a trait A exists in 10% of a population of an asexually reproducing
species and a trait B exists in 60% of the same population, which trait
is likely to have arisen earlier?
2. How does the creation of variations in a species promote survival?
Activity 8.1Activity 8.1Activity 8.1Activity 8.1Activity 8.1
Observe the ears of all the students in the class. Prepare a list of
students having free or attached earlobes and calculate the
percentage of students having each (Fig. 8.2). Find out about the
earlobes of the parents of each student in the class. Correlate the
earlobe type of each student with that of their parents. Based on
this evidence, suggest a possible rule for the inheritance of earlobe
types.
8.2.2 Rules for the Inheritance of T raits –––––
Mendel’s Contributions
The rules for inheritance of such traits in human beings are related to
the fact that both the father and the mother contribute practically equal
amounts of genetic material to the child. This means that each trait can
be influenced by both paternal and maternal DNA. Thus, for each trait
there will be two versions in each child. What will, then, the trait seen in
the child be? Mendel (see box) worked out the main rules of such
inheritance, and it is interesting to look at some of his experiments from
more than a century ago.Figure 8.2Figure 8.2Figure 8.2Figure 8.2Figure 8.2
(a) Free and (b) attached
earlobes. The lowest part
of the ear , called the
earlobe, is closely attached
to the side of the head in
some of us, and not
in others. Free and
attached earlobes are two
variants found in human
populations.different kinds of advantages. Bacteria that can withstand heat will survive
better in a heat wave, as we have discussed earlier . Selection of variants
by environmental factors forms the basis for evolutionary processes, as
we will discuss in later sections.
(a)
(b)
Reprint 2025-26
Science 130Mendel used a number of contrasting visible characters of garden
peas – round/wrinkled seeds, tall/short plants, white/violet flowers and
so on.  He took pea plants with different characteristics – a tall plant and
a short plant, produced progeny by crossing them, and calculated the
percentages of tall or short progeny.
In the first place, there were no halfway characteristics in this first-
generation, or F1 progeny – no ‘medium-height’ plants. All plants were
tall. This meant that only one of the parental traits
was seen, not some mixture of the two. So the next
question was, were the tall plants in the F1
generation exactly the same as the tall plants of the
parent generation? Mendelian experiments test this
by getting both the parental plants and these F1 tall
plants to reproduce by self-pollination. The progeny
of the par ental plants ar e, of course, all tall. However ,
the second-generation, or F2, progeny of the F1 tall
plants are not all tall. Instead, one quarter of them
are short. This indicates that both the tallness and
shortness traits were inherited in the F1 plants, but
only the tallness trait was expressed. This led Mendel
to propose that two copies of factor (now called genes)
controlling traits are present in sexually reproducing
organism. These two may be identical, or may be
different, depending on the parentage. A pattern of
inheritance can be worked out with this assumption,
as shown in Fig. 8.3.Gregor Johann Mendel (1822–1884)
Mendel was educated in a monastery and went on to study science and
mathematics at the University of Vienna. Failure in the examinations for a
teaching certificate did not suppress his zeal for scientific quest. He went
back to his monastery and started growing peas. Many others had studied
the inheritance of traits in peas and other or ganisms earlier , but Mendel
blended his knowledge of science and mathematics and was the first one
to keep count of individuals exhibiting a particular trait in each generation.
This helped him to arrive at the laws of inheritance.
Figure 8.3Figure 8.3Figure 8.3Figure 8.3Figure 8.3
Inheritance of traits
over two generations Activity 8.2Activity 8.2Activity 8.2Activity 8.2Activity 8.2
In Fig. 8.3, what experiment would we do to confirm that the F2
generation did in fact have a 1:2:1 ratio of TT, Tt and tt trait
combinations?
In this explanation, both TT and Tt are tall plants, while only tt is a
short plant. In other words, a single copy of ‘T’ is enough to make the
plant tall, while both copies have to be ‘t’ for the plant to be short. T raits
like ‘T’ are called dominant traits, while those that behave like ‘t’ are
called r ecessive traits. W ork out which trait would be consider ed
dominant and which one recessive in Fig. 8.4.
Reprint 2025-26
Heredity 131
xRR yy(round, green)rr YY(wrinkled, yellow)
Ry
rY
Rr Yy(round, yellow)F1x
Rr YyF1Rr YyF1
315 round, yellow108 round, green101 wrinkled, yellow32 wrinkled, green
9331556 seeds16Figure 9.5 Independent inheritance of twoseparate traits, shape and colour of seeds
RYRyrYry
RYRyrYryRRYY RRYy RrYY RrYyRRYy RRyy RrYy RryyRrYY RrYy rrYY rrYyRrYy Rryy rrYy rryyF2
Figure 8.5Figure 8.5Figure 8.5Figure 8.5Figure 8.5
Independent inheritance
of two separate traits,
shape and colour of seedsWhat happens when pea plants showing two different
characteristics, rather than just one, are bred with each other?
What do the progeny of a tall plant with round seeds and a short
plant with wrinkled-seeds look like? They are all tall and have
round seeds. Tallness and round seeds are thus dominant traits.
But what happens when these F1 progeny are used to generate
F2 progeny by self-pollination? A Mendelian experiment will find
that some F2 progeny are tall plants with round seeds, and some
were short plants with wrinkled seeds.  However , ther e would also
be some F2 progeny that showed new combinations. Some of them
would be tall, but have wrinkled seeds, while others would be short,
but have r ound seeds. Y ou can see as to how new combinations of
traits are formed in F2 offspring when factors controlling for seed
shape and seed colour recombine to form zygote leading to form
F2 offspring (Fig. 8.5). Thus, the tall/short trait and the round
seed/wrinkled seed trait are independently inherited.
8.2.3 How do these T raits get Expressed?
How does the mechanism of heredity work? Cellular DNA is
the information source for making proteins in the cell. A section
of DNA that provides information for one protein is called the
gene for that protein. How do proteins control the
characteristics that we are discussing here? Let us take the
example of tallness as a characteristic. W e know that plants
have hormones that can trigger growth. Plant height can thus
depend on the amount of a particular plant hormone. The
amount of the plant hormone made will depend on the
efficiency of the process for making it. Consider now an enzyme
that is important for this process. If this enzyme works
efficiently, a lot of hormone will be made, and the plant will be
tall. If the gene for that enzyme has an alteration that makes
the enzyme less efficient, the amount of hormone will be less,
and the plant will be short. Thus, genes control characteristics,
or traits.
If the interpretations of Mendelian experiments we have been
discussing are correct, then both parents must be contributing
equally to the DNA of the progeny during sexual reproduction.
We have disscussed this issue in the pr evious Chapter . If both
parents can help determine the trait in the progeny, both parents
must be contributing a copy of the same gene. This means that
each pea plant must have two sets of all genes, one inherited from
each parent. For this mechanism to work, each germ cell must
have only one gene set.
How do germ-cells make a single set of genes from the normal two
copies that all other cells in the body have? If progeny plants inherited a
single whole gene set from each parent, then the experiment explained
in Fig. 8.5 cannot work. This is because the two characteristics ‘R’ and
‘y’ would then be linked to each other and cannot be independentlyFigure 8.4Figure 8.4Figure 8.4Figure 8.4Figure 8.4
Reprint 2025-26
Science 132inherited. This is explained by the fact that each gene set is present, not
as a single long thread of DNA, but as separate independent pieces,
each called a chromosome. Thus, each cell will have two copies of each
chromosome, one each from the male and female parents. Every germ-
cell will take one chromosome from each pair and these may be of either
maternal or paternal origin. When two germ cells combine, they will
restore the normal number of chromosomes in the progeny, ensuring
the stability of the DNA of the species. Such a mechanism of inheritance
explains the results of the Mendel experiments, and is used by all
sexually reproducing organisms. But asexually reproducing organisms
also follow similar rules of inheritance. Can we work out how their
inheritance might work?
8.2.4 Se x Deter mination
We have discussed the idea that the two sexes participating in sexual
reproduction must be somewhat different from each other for a number
of reasons. How is the sex of a newborn individual
determined? Different species use very different strategies
for this. Some rely entirely on environmental cues. Thus,
in some animals like a few reptiles, the temperature at
which fertilised eggs are kept determines whether the
animals developing in the eggs will be male or female. In
other animals, such as snails, individuals can change sex,
indicating that sex is not genetically deter mined. However ,
in human beings, the sex of the individual is largely
genetically determined. In other words, the genes inherited
from our parents decide whether we will be boys or girls.
But so far , we have assumed that similar gene sets ar e
inherited from both parents. If that is the case, how can
genetic inheritance determine sex?
The explanation lies in the fact that all human
chromosomes are not paired. Most human chromosomes
have a maternal and a paternal copy, and we have 22
such pairs. But one pair , called the sex chr omosomes, is
odd in not always being a per fect pair . Women have a
perfect pair of sex chromosomes, both called X. But men
have a mismatched pair in which one is a normal-sized X
while the other is a short one called Y . So women ar e XX,
while men ar e XY. Now, can we work out what the
inheritance pattern of X and Y will be?
As Fig. 8.6 shows, half the children will be boys and
half will be girls. All children will inherit an X chromosome
from their mother regardless of whether they are boys or
girls. Thus, the sex of the children will be determined by
what they inherit fr om their father . A child who inherits
an X chromosome from her father will be a girl, and one
who inherits a Y chromosome from him will be a boy.Figure 8.6Figure 8.6Figure 8.6Figure 8.6Figure 8.6
Sex determination in
human beings
Reprint 2025-26
Heredity 133QUESTIONS
?1. How do Mendel’s experiments show that traits may be dominant or
recessive?
2. How do Mendel’s experiments show that traits are inherited
independently?
3. A man with blood group A marries a woman with blood group O and
their daughter has blood group O. Is this information enough to tell you
which of the traits – blood group A or O – is dominant? Why or why not?
4. How is the sex of the child determined in human beings?
What y ou hav e learnt
Variations arising during the pr ocess of r eproduction can be inherited.
These variations may lead to increased survival of the individuals.
Sexually reproducing individuals have two copies of genes for the same trait. If the
copies are not identical, the trait that gets expressed is called the dominant trait
and the other is called the recessive trait.
Traits in one individual may be inherited separately, giving rise to new combinations
of traits in the offspring of sexual reproduction.
Sex is determined by different factors in various species. In human beings, the
sex of the child depends on whether the paternal chromosome is X (for girls) or Y
(for boys).
EXERCISES
1.A Mendelian experiment consisted of breeding tall pea plants bearing violet flowers
with short pea plants bearing white flowers. The progeny all bore violet flowers,
but almost half of them were short. This suggests that the genetic make-up of the
tall parent can be depicted as
(a) TTWW
(b) TTww
(c) TtWW
(d) TtWw
2.A study found that children with light-coloured eyes are likely to have parents
with light-coloured eyes. On this basis, can we say anything about whether the
light eye colour trait is dominant or recessive? Why or why not?
3.Outline a project which aims to find the dominant coat colour in dogs.
4.How is the equal genetic contribution of male and female parents ensured in
the progeny?
Reprint 2025-26
How do Organisms
Reproduce ?7 CHAPTER
Before we discuss the mechanisms by which organisms reproduce,
let us ask a more basic question – why do organisms reproduce?
After all, reproduction is not necessary to maintain the life of an individual
organism, unlike the essential life processes such as nutrition,
respiration, or excretion. On the other hand, if an individual organism is
going to create more individuals, a lot of its energy will be spent in the
process. So why should an individual organism waste energy on a process
it does not need to stay alive? It would be interesting to discuss the
possible answers in the classroom!
Whatever the answer to this question, it is obvious that we notice
organisms because they reproduce. If there were to be only one, non-
reproducing member of a particular kind, it is doubtful that we would
have noticed its existence. It is the large numbers of organisms belonging
to a single species that bring them to our notice. How do we know that
two different individual organisms belong to the same species? Usually,
we say this because they look similar to each other . Thus, r eproducing
organisms create new individuals that look very much like themselves.
7.1 DO ORG7.1 DO ORG7.1 DO ORG7.1 DO ORG7.1 DO ORG ANISMS CREAANISMS CREAANISMS CREAANISMS CREAANISMS CREA TE EXATE EXATE EXATE EXATE EXA CT COPIES OFCT COPIES OFCT COPIES OFCT COPIES OFCT COPIES OF
THEMSELTHEMSELTHEMSEL THEMSELTHEMSEL VES? VES?VES? VES?VES?
Organisms look similar because their body designs ar e similar . If body
designs ar e to be similar , the blueprints for these designs should be
similar . Thus, r eproduction at its most basic level will involve making
copies of the blueprints of body design. In Class IX, we learnt that the
chromosomes in the nucleus of a cell contain information for inheritance
of features from parents to next generation in the form of DNA (Deoxyribo
Nucleic Acid) molecules. The DNA in the cell nucleus is the information
source for making proteins. If the information is changed, different
proteins will be made. Different proteins will eventually lead to altered
body designs.
Therefore, a basic event in reproduction is the creation of a DNA
copy. Cells use chemical reactions to build copies of their DNA. This
creates two copies of the DNA in a reproducing cell, and they will need to
be separated fr om each other . However , keeping one copy of DNA in the
original cell and simply pushing the other one out would not work,
Reprint 2025-26
Science 114?because the copy pushed out would not have any organised cellular
structure for maintaining life processes. Therefore, DNA copying is
accompanied by the creation of an additional cellular apparatus, and
then the DNA copies separate, each with its own cellular apparatus.
Effectively, a cell divides to give rise to two cells.
These two cells ar e of course similar , but ar e they likely to be
absolutely identical? The answer to this question will depend on how
accurately the copying r eactions involved occur . No bio-chemical r eaction
is absolutely reliable. Therefore, it is only to be expected that the process
of copying the DNA will have some variations each time. As a result, the
DNA copies generated will be similar , but may not be identical to the
original. Some of these variations might be so drastic that the new DNA
copy cannot work with the cellular apparatus it inherits. Such a newborn
cell will simply die. On the other hand, there could still be many other
variations in the DNA copies that would not lead to such a drastic
outcome. Thus, the surviving cells are similar to, but subtly different
from each other . This inbuilt tendency for variation during r eproduction
is the basis for evolution, as we will discuss in the next chapter .
7.1.1 The Impor tance of V ariation
Populations of organisms fill well-defined places, or niches, in the
ecosystem, using their ability to reproduce. The consistency of DNA
copying during reproduction is important for the maintenance of body
design features that allow the organism to use that particular niche.
Reproduction is therefore linked to the stability of populations of species.
However , niches can change because of r easons beyond the contr ol
of the organisms. Temperatures on earth can go up or down, water levels
can vary, or there could be meteorite hits, to think of a few examples. If
a population of reproducing organisms were suited to a particular niche
and if the niche were drastically altered, the population could be wiped
out. However , if some variations wer e to be pr esent in a few individuals
in these populations, there would be some chance for them to survive.
Thus, if there were a population of bacteria living in temperate waters,
and if the water temperature were to be increased by global warming,
most of these bacteria would die, but the few variants resistant to heat
would survive and gr ow further . Variation is thus useful for the survival
of species over time.
QUESTIONS
1. What is the importance of DNA copying in reproduction?
2. Why is variation beneficial to the species but not necessarily
for the individual?
Reprint 2025-26
How do Organisms Reproduce? 115
Figure 7.1(a)Figure 7.1(a)Figure 7.1(a)Figure 7.1(a)Figure 7.1(a)  B i n a r y  f i s s i o n  i n  A m o e b aActivity 7.2Activity 7.2Activity 7.2Activity 7.2Activity 7.27.2 MODES OF REPRODUCTION USED BY SINGLE7.2 MODES OF REPRODUCTION USED BY SINGLE7.2 MODES OF REPRODUCTION USED BY SINGLE7.2 MODES OF REPRODUCTION USED BY SINGLE7.2 MODES OF REPRODUCTION USED BY SINGLE
ORGANISMSORGANISMSORGANISMSORGANISMSORGANISMS
Activity 7.1Activity 7.1Activity 7.1Activity 7.1Activity 7.1
Dissolve about 10 gm of sugar in 100 mL of water .
Take 20 mL of this solution in a test tube and add a pinch of yeast
granules to it.
Put a cotton plug on the mouth of the test tube and keep it in a
warm place.
After 1 or 2 hours, put a small drop of yeast culture from the test
tube on a slide and cover it with a coverslip.
Observe the slide under a microscope.
Wet a slice of br ead, and keep it in a cool, moist and dark place.
Observe the surface of the slice with a magnifying glass.
Record your observations for a week.
Compare and contrast the ways in which yeast grows in the first
case, and how mould grows in the second.
Having discussed the context in which reproductive processes work,
let us now examine how different organisms actually reproduce. The
modes by which various organisms reproduce depend on the body
design of the organisms.
7.2.1 Fission
For unicellular organisms, cell division, or fission, leads to the creation
of new individuals. Many different patterns of fission have been observed.
Many bacteria and protozoa simply split into two equal halves during
cell division. In organisms such as Amoeba , the splitting of the two cells
during division can take place in any plane.
Activity 7.3Activity 7.3Activity 7.3Activity 7.3Activity 7.3
Observe a permanent slide of
Amoeba  under a microscope.
Similarly observe another
permanent slide of Amoeba
showing binary fission.
Now, compare the observations of
both the slides.
However , some unicellular or ganisms
show somewhat more organisation of their
bodies, such as is seen in Leishmania  (which
cause kala-azar ), which have a whip-like
structure at one end of the cell. In such
organisms, binary fission occurs in a definite orientation in relation to
Figure 7.1(b)Figure 7.1(b)Figure 7.1(b)Figure 7.1(b)Figure 7.1(b)  B i n a r y  f i s s i o n  i n  L e i s h m a n i a  (a)         (b)          (c)          (d)            (e)                        (f)
Reprint 2025-26
Science 116these structures. Other single-celled organisms, such as the malarial
parasite, Plasmodium , divide into many daughter cells simultaneously
by multiple fission.
Yeast, on the other hand, can put out small buds that separate and
grow further , as we saw in Activity 7.1.
7.2.2 FragmentationFigure 7.2Figure 7.2Figure 7.2Figure 7.2Figure 7.2
Multiple fission in
Plasmodium Activity 7.4Activity 7.4Activity 7.4Activity 7.4Activity 7.4
Collect water from a lake or pond that appears dark green and
contains filamentous structures.
Put one or two filaments on a slide.
Put a drop of glycerine on these filaments and cover it with a coverslip.
Observe the slide under a microscope.
Can you identify different tissues in the Spirogyra  filaments?
In multi-cellular organisms with relatively simple body organisation,
simple reproductive methods can still work. Spirogyra , for example,
simply breaks up into smaller pieces upon maturation. These pieces or
fragments grow into new individuals. Can we work out the reason for
this, based on what we saw in Activity 7.4?
This is not true for all multi-cellular organisms. They cannot simply
divide cell-by-cell. The reason is that many multi-cellular organisms, as
we have seen, are not simply a random collection of cells. Specialised
cells are organised as tissues, and tissues are organised into organs,
which then have to be placed at definite positions in the body. In such a
carefully organised situation, cell-by-cell division would be impractical.
Multi-cellular organisms, therefore, need to use more complex ways of
reproduction.
A basic strategy used in multi-cellular organisms is that different
cell types perform different specialised functions. Following this general
pattern, reproduction in such organisms is also the function of a specific
cell type. How is reproduction to be achieved from a single cell type, if
the organism itself consists of many cell types? The answer is that there
must be a single cell type in the organism that is capable of growing,
proliferating and making other cell types under the right circumstances.
7.2.3 Regeneration
Many fully differentiated organisms have the ability to give rise to new
individual organisms from their body parts. That is, if the individual is
somehow cut or broken up into many pieces, many of these pieces grow
into separate individuals. For example, simple animals like Hydra  and
Planaria  can be cut into any number of pieces and each piece grows
into a complete organism. This is known as regeneration (see Fig. 7.3).
Regeneration is carried out by specialised cells. These cells proliferate
and make large numbers of cells. From this mass of cells, different cells
undergo changes to become various cell types and tissues. These changes
Reprint 2025-26
How do Organisms Reproduce? 117
Figure 7.3 Figure 7.3 Figure 7.3 Figure 7.3 Figure 7.3 Regeneration in Planariatake place in an organised
sequence referred to as
development. However ,
regeneration is not the same
as reproduction, since most
organisms would not
normally depend on being cut
up to be able to reproduce.
7.2.4 Budding
Organisms such as Hydra
use regenerative cells for
reproduction in the process of
budding. In Hydra , a bud
develops as an outgrowth due
to repeated cell division at one
specific site (Fig. 7.4). These buds develop into tiny individuals and when
fully mature, detach from the parent body and become new independent
individuals.
Figure 7.4Figure 7.4Figure 7.4Figure 7.4Figure 7.4  Budding in Hydra
7.2.5 V egetative Propagation
There are many plants in which parts like the root, stem and leaves
develop into new plants under appropriate conditions. Unlike in most
animals, plants can indeed use such a mode for reproduction. This
property of vegetative propagation is used in methods such as layering
or grafting to grow many plants like sugarcane, roses, or grapes for
agricultural purposes. Plants raised by vegetative propagation can bear
flowers and fruits earlier than those produced from seeds. Such methods
also make possible the propagation of plants such as banana, orange,
rose and jasmine that have lost the capacity to produce seeds. Another
advantage of vegetative propagation is that all plants produced are
genetically similar enough to the parent plant to have all its
characteristics.
Reprint 2025-26
Science 118Similarly buds produced in the notches along the leaf
margin of Bryophyllum  fall on the soil and develop into
new plants (Fig. 7.5).
Activity 7.6Activity 7.6Activity 7.6Activity 7.6Activity 7.6
Select a money-plant.
Cut some pieces such that they contain at least
one leaf.
Cut out some other portions between two leaves.
Dip one end of all the pieces in water and observe
over the next few days.
Which ones grow and give rise to fresh leaves?
What can you conclude from your observations?
Tissue cultur e
In tissue culture, new plants are grown by removing tissue or separating cells from
the growing tip of a plant. The cells are then placed in an artificial medium where they
divide rapidly to form a small group of cells or callus. The callus is transferred to
another medium containing hormones for growth and differentiation. The plantlets
are then placed in the soil so that they can grow into mature plants. Using tissue
culture, many plants can be grown from one parent in disease-free conditions. This
technique is commonly used for ornamental plants.
7.2.6 Spore F ormation
Even in many simple multi-cellular organisms, specific reproductive
parts can be identified. The thread-like structures that developed on
the bread in Activity 7.2 above are the hyphae of the bread mould
(Rhizopus ). They are not reproductive parts. On the other hand, the
tiny blob-on-a-stick structures are involved in reproduction. The
blobs are sporangia, which contain cells, or spores, that can
eventually develop into new Rhizopus  individuals (Fig. 7.6). The spores
are covered by thick walls that protect them until they come into
contact with another moist surface and can begin to grow.
Figure 7.6Figure 7.6Figure 7.6Figure 7.6Figure 7.6
Spore formation in RhizopusActivity 7.5Activity 7.5Activity 7.5Activity 7.5Activity 7.5
Take a potato and observe its surface. Can notches be seen?
Cut the potato into small pieces such that some pieces contain a
notch or bud and some do not.
Spread some cotton on a tray and wet it. Place the potato pieces
on this cotton. Note where the pieces with the buds are placed.
Observe changes taking place in these potato pieces over the next
few days. Make sure that the cotton is kept moistened.
Which are the potato pieces that give rise to fresh green shoots
and roots?
Figure 7.5Figure 7.5Figure 7.5Figure 7.5Figure 7.5
Leaf of Bryophyllum
with buds
More to Know?
Reprint 2025-26
How do Organisms Reproduce? 119All the modes of reproduction that we have discussed so far allow
new generations to be created from a single individual. This is known as
asexual reproduction.
QUESTIONS
?1. How does binary fission differ from multiple fission?
2. How will an organism be benefited if it reproduces through spores?
3. Can you think of reasons why more complex organisms cannot give
rise to new individuals through regeneration?
4. Why is vegetative propagation practised for growing some types of
plants?
5. Why is DNA copying an essential part of the process of reproduction?
7.3 SEXUAL REPRODUCTION7.3 SEXUAL REPRODUCTION7.3 SEXUAL REPRODUCTION7.3 SEXUAL REPRODUCTION7.3 SEXUAL REPRODUCTION
We are also familiar with modes of r eproduction that depend on the
involvement of two individuals before a new generation can be created.
Bulls alone cannot produce new calves, nor can hens alone produce
new chicks. In such cases, both sexes, males and females, are needed to
produce new generations. What is the significance of this sexual mode
of reproduction? Are there any limitations of the asexual mode of
reproduction, which we have been discussing above?
7.3.1 Why the Sexual Mode of Reproduction?
The creation of two new cells from one involves copying of the DNA as
well as of the cellular apparatus. The DNA copying mechanism, as we
have noted, cannot be absolutely accurate, and the resultant errors are
a source of variations in populations of organisms. Every individual
organism cannot be protected by variations, but in a population,
variations are useful for ensuring the survival of the species. It would
therefore make sense if organisms came up with reproductive modes
that allowed more and more variation to be generated.
While DNA-copying mechanisms are not absolutely accurate, they
are precise enough to make the generation of variation a fairly slow
process. If the DNA copying mechanisms were to be less accurate, many
of the resultant DNA copies would not be able to work with the cellular
apparatus, and would die. So how can the process of making variants
be speeded up? Each new variation is made in a DNA copy that already
has variations accumulated from previous generations. Thus, two
different individuals in a population would have quite different patterns
of accumulated variations. Since all of these variations are in living
individuals, it is assured that they do not have any really bad effects.
Combining variations from two or more individuals would thus create
new combinations of variants. Each combination would be novel, since
it would involve two different individuals. The sexual mode of
Reprint 2025-26
Science 120reproduction incorporates such a process of combining DNA from two
different individuals during reproduction.
But this creates a major difficulty. If each new generation is to be the
combination of the DNA copies from two pre-existing individuals, then
each new generation will end up having twice the amount of DNA that
the previous generation had. This is likely to mess up the control of the
cellular apparatus by the DNA. How many ways can we think of for
solving this difficulty?
We have seen earlier that as or ganisms become mor e complex, the
specialisation of tissue increases. One solution that many multi-cellular
organisms have found for the problem mentioned above is to have special
lineages of cells in specialised organs in which only half the number of
chromosomes and half the amount of DNA as compared to the non-
reproductive body cells. This is achieved by a process of cell division
called meiosis. Thus, when these germ-cells from two individuals combine
during sexual reproduction to form a new individual, it results in re-
establishment of the number of chromosomes and the DNA content in
the new generation.
If the zygote is to grow and develop into an organism which has
highly specialised tissues and organs, then it has to have sufficient stores
of energy for doing this. In very simple organisms, it is seen that the two
germ-cells ar e not very dif ferent fr om one another , or may even be similar .
But as the body designs become more complex, the germ-cells also
specialise. One germ-cell is large and contains the food-stores while the
other is smaller and likely to be motile. Conventionally, the motile germ-
cell is called the male gamete and the germ-cell containing the stored
food is called the female gamete. W e shall see in the next few sections
how the need to create these two different types of gametes give rise to
differences in the male and female reproductive organs and, in some
cases, differences in the bodies of the male and female organisms.
7.3.2 Sexual Reproduction in Flowering Plants
The r eproductive parts of angiosper ms ar e located in the flower . You
have already studied the different parts of a flower – sepals, petals,
stamens and pistil. Stamens and pistil are
the reproductive parts of a flower which
contain the germ-cells.  W h a t  p o s s i b l e
functions could the petals and sepals serve?
The flower may be unisexual (papaya,
watermelon) when it contains either stamens
or pistil or bisexual ( Hibiscus , mustard)
when it contains both stamens and pistil.
Stamen is the male reproductive part and it
produces pollen grains that are yellowish
in colour . You must have seen this yellowish
powder that often sticks to our hands if we
touch the stamen of a flower . Pistil is pr esent
in the centre of a flower and is the female
reproductive part. It is made of three parts.
Figure 7.7Figure 7.7Figure 7.7Figure 7.7Figure 7.7
Longitudinal section of
flower
Reprint 2025-26
How do Organisms Reproduce? 121
Figure 7.8Figure 7.8Figure 7.8Figure 7.8Figure 7.8
Germination of pollen on
stigmaThe swollen bottom part is the ovary, middle elongated part is the style
and the terminal part which may be sticky is the stigma. The ovary
contains ovules and each ovule has an egg cell. The male germ-cell
produced by pollen grain fuses with the female gamete present in
the ovule. This fusion of the germ-cells or fertilisation gives us the
zygote which is capable of growing into a new plant.
Thus the pollen needs to be transferred from the stamen to the
stigma. If this transfer of pollen occurs in the same flower , it is
referred to as self-pollination. On the other hand, if the pollen is
transferr ed fr om one flower to another , it is known as cr oss-
pollination. This transfer of pollen from one flower to another is
achieved by agents like wind, water or animals.
After the pollen lands on a suitable stigma, it has to reach the
female germ-cells which are in the ovary. For this, a tube grows
out of the pollen grain and travels through the style to reach the
ovary.
After fertilisation, the zygote divides several times to form an
embryo within the ovule. The ovule develops a tough coat and is
gradually converted into a seed. The ovary grows rapidly and ripens
to form a fruit. Meanwhile, the petals, sepals, stamens, style and
stigma may shrivel and fall off. Have you ever observed any flower
part still persisting in the fruit? T ry and work out the advantages
of seed-formation for the plant. The seed contains the future plant
or embryo which develops into a seedling under appropriate
conditions. This process is known as germination.
Activity 7.7Activity 7.7Activity 7.7Activity 7.7Activity 7.7
Soak a few seeds of Bengal gram ( chana )
and keep them overnight.
Drain the excess water and cover the seeds
with a wet cloth and leave them for a day.
Make sure that the seeds do not become dry.
Cut open the seeds carefully and observe
the different parts.
Compare your observations with the Fig. 7.9
and see if you can identify all the parts.
7.3.3 Reproduction in Human Beings
So far , we have been discussing the variety of modes that dif ferent species
use for reproduction. Let us now look at the species that we are most
interested in, namely, humans. Humans use a sexual mode of
reproduction. How does this process work?
Let us begin at an apparently unrelated point. All of us know that
our bodies change as we become older . You have lear nt changes that
take place in your body earlier in Class VIII also. W e notice that our
height has incr eased continuously fr om early age till now. W e acquir e
teeth, we even lose the old, so-called milk teeth and acquire new ones.
Figure 7.9Figure 7.9Figure 7.9Figure 7.9Figure 7.9
Germination
Reprint 2025-26
Science 122All of these are changes that can be grouped under the general process
of growth, in which the body becomes lar ger. But in early teenage years,
a whole new set of changes occurs that cannot be explained simply as
body enlargement. Instead, the appearance of the body changes.
Proportions change, new featur es appear , and so do new sensations.
Some of these changes ar e common to both boys and girls. W e begin
to notice thick hair growing in new parts of the body such as armpits
and the genital area between the thighs, which can also become darker
in colour . Thinner hair can also appear on legs and ar ms, as well as on
the face. The skin frequently becomes oily and we might begin to develop
pimples. W e begin to be conscious and awar e of both our own bodies
and those of others in new ways.
On the other hand, there are also changes taking place that are
different between boys and girls. In girls, breast size begins to increase,
with darkening of the skin of the nipples at the tips of the breasts. Also,
girls begin to menstruate at around this time. Boys begin to have new
thick hair gr owth on the face and their voices begin to crack. Further ,
the penis occasionally begins to become enlarged and erect, either in
daydreams or at night.
All of these changes take place slowly, over a period of months and
years. They do not happen all at the same time in one person, nor do
they happen at an exact age. In some people, they happen early and
quickly, while in others, they can happen slowly. Also, each change does
not become complete quickly either . So, for example, thick hair on the
face in boys appears as a few scattered hairs first, and only slowly does
the growth begin to become uniform. Even so, all these changes show
differences between people. Just as we have differently shaped noses or
fingers, so also we have different patterns of hair growth, or size and
shape of breast or penis. All of these changes are aspects of the sexual
maturation of the body.
Why does the body show sexual maturation at this age? W e have
talked about the need for specialised cell types in multi-cellular bodies
to carry out specialised functions. The creation of germ-cells to participate
in sexual reproduction is another specialised function, and we have seen
that plants develop special cell and tissue types to create them. Human
beings also develop special tissues for this purpose. However , while the
body of the individual organism is growing to its adult size, the resources
of the body are mainly directed at achieving this growth. While that is
happening, the maturation of the reproductive tissue is not likely to be
a major priority. Thus, as the rate of general body growth begins to slow
down, reproductive tissues begin to mature. This period during
adolescence is called puberty.
So how do all the changes that we have talked about link to the
reproductive pr ocess? W e must r emember that the sexual mode of
reproduction means that germ-cells from two individuals have to join
together . This can happen by the exter nal release of ger m-cells fr om the
bodies of individuals, as happens in flowering plants. Or it can happen
by two individuals joining their bodies together for internal transfer of
germ-cells for fusion, as happens in many animals. If animals are to
Reprint 2025-26
How do Organisms Reproduce? 123participate in this process of mating, their state of sexual maturity must
be identifiable by other individuals. Many changes during puberty, such
as new hair -growth patter ns, ar e signals that sexual maturation is taking
place.
On the other hand, the actual transfer of germ-cells between two
people needs special organs for the sexual act, such as the penis when it
is capable of becoming erect. In mammals such as humans, the baby is
carried in the mother’s body for a long period, and will be breast-fed
later. The female r eproductive or gans and br easts will need to matur e to
accommodate these possibilities. Let us look at the systems involved in
the process of sexual reproduction.
7.3.3 (a) Male Reproductive System
The male reproductive system (Fig. 7.10)
consists of portions which produce the
germ-cells and other portions that deliver
the germ-cells to the site of fertilisation.
The formation of germ-cells or sperms
takes place in the testes. These are located
outside the abdominal cavity in scrotum
because sperm formation requires a lower
temperature than the normal body
temperatur e. We have discussed the r ole of the
testes in the secretion of the hormone,
testoster one, in the pr evious chapter . In
addition to regulating the formation of sperms,
testosterone brings about changes in
appearance seen in boys at the time of puberty.
The sperms formed are delivered
through the vas deferens which unites with
a tube coming fr om the urinary bladder . The
urethra thus forms a common passage for
both the sperms and urine. Along the path
of the vas deferens, glands like the prostate
and the seminal vesicles add their secretions
so that the sperms are now in a fluid which
makes their transport easier and this fluid
also provides nutrition. The sperms are tiny
bodies that consist of mainly genetic
material and a long tail that helps them to
move towards the female germ-cell.
7.3.3 (b) Female Reproductive System
The female germ-cells or eggs are made in
the ovaries. They are also responsible for the
production of some hormones. Look at
Fig. 7.11 and identify the various organs in
the female reproductive system.
Figure 7.10 Figure 7.10 Figure 7.10 Figure 7.10 Figure 7.10 Huma n–male reproductive system
Figure 7.11 Figure 7.11 Figure 7.11 Figure 7.11 Figure 7.11 Huma n–female reproductive system
Reprint 2025-26
Science 124When a girl is born, the ovaries already contain thousands of
immature eggs. On reaching puberty, some of these start maturing. One
egg is produced every month by one of the ovaries. The egg is carried
from the ovary to the womb through a thin oviduct or fallopian tube.
The two oviducts unite into an elastic bag-like structure known as the
uterus. The uterus opens into the vagina through the cervix.
The sperms enter through the vaginal passage during sexual
intercourse. They travel upwards and reach the oviduct where they may
encounter the egg. The fertilised egg (zygote) starts dividing and form a
ball of cells or embryo. The embryo i s implanted in the li ning of the uterus
where they continue to gr ow and develop or gans to become foetus. W e
have seen in earlier sections that the mother’s body is designed to
undertake the development of the child. Hence the uterus prepares itself
every month to receive and nurture the growing embryo. The lining
thickens and is richly supplied with blood to nourish the growing embryo.
The embryo gets nutrition from the mother’s blood with the help of a
special tissue called placenta. This is a disc which is embedded in the
uterine wall. It contains villi on the embryo’s side of the tissue. On the
mother’s side are blood spaces, which surround the villi. This provides
a large surface area for glucose and oxygen to pass from the mother to
the embryo. The developing embryo will also generate waste substances
which can be removed by transferring them into the mother’s blood
through the placenta. The development of the child inside the mother’s
body takes approximately nine months. The child is born as a result of
rhythmic contractions of the muscles in the uterus.
7.3.3 (c) What happens when the Egg is not F ertilised?
If the egg is not fertilised, it lives for about one day. Since the ovary
releases one egg every month, the uterus also prepares itself every month
to receive a fertilised egg. Thus its lining becomes thick and spongy.
This would be required for nourishing the embryo if fertilisation had
taken place. Now, however , this lining is not needed any longer . So, the
lining slowly breaks and comes out through the vagina as blood and
mucous. This cycle takes place roughly every month and is known as
menstruation. It usually lasts for about two to eight days.
7.3.3 (d) Reproductive Health
As we have seen, the process of sexual maturation is gradual, and takes
place while general body growth is still going on. Therefore, some degree
of sexual maturation does not necessarily mean that the body or the
mind is ready for sexual acts or for having and bringing up children.
How do we decide if the body or the mind is ready for this major
responsibility? All of us are under many different kinds of pressures
about these issues. There can be pressure from our friends for
participating in many activities, whether we really want to or not. There
can be pressure from families to get married and start having children.
There can be pressure from government agencies to avoid having
children. In this situation, making choices can become very difficult.
Reprint 2025-26
How do Organisms Reproduce? 125We must also consider the possible health consequences of having
sex. W e have discussed in Class IX that diseases can be transmitted
from person to person in a variety of ways. Since the sexual act is a
very intimate connection of bodies, it is not surprising that many
diseases can be sexually transmitted. These include bacterial infections
such as gonorrhoea and syphilis, and viral infections such as warts
and HIV-AIDS. Is it possible to prevent the transmission of such diseases
during the sexual act? Using a covering, called a condom, for the penis
during sex helps to prevent transmission of many of these infections to
some extent.
The sexual act always has the potential to lead to pregnancy.
Pregnancy will make major demands on the body and the mind of the
woman, and if she is not ready for it, her health will be adversely
affected. Therefore, many ways have been devised to avoid pregnancy.
These contraceptive methods fall in a number of categories. One
category is the creation of a mechanical barrier so that sperm does not
reach the egg. Condoms on the penis or similar coverings worn in the
vagina can serve this purpose. Another category of contraceptives acts
by changing the hormonal balance of the body so that eggs are not
released and fertilisation cannot occur . These drugs commonly need
to be taken orally as pills. However , since they change hor monal
balances, they can cause side -effects too. Other contraceptive devices
such as the loop or the copper -T are placed in the uterus to pr event
pregnancy. Again, they can cause side effects due to irritation of the
uterus. If the vas deferens in the male is blocked, sperm transfer will
be prevented. If the fallopian tube in the female is blocked, the egg will
not be able to reach the uterus. In both cases fertilisation will not take
place. Surgical methods can be used to create such blocks. While
surgical methods are safe in the long run, surgery itself can cause
infections and other problems if not performed properly. Surgery can
also be used for removal of unwanted pregnancies. These may be
misused by people who do not want a particular child, as happens in
illegal sex-selective abortion of female foetuses. For a healthy society,
the female-male sex ratio must be maintained. Because of reckless
female foeticides, child sex ratio is declining at an alarming rate in
some sections of our society, although prenatal sex determination has
been prohibited by law.
We have noted earlier that r eproduction is the pr ocess by which
organisms increase their populations. The rates of birth and death in a
given population will determine its size. The size of the human population
is a cause for concern for many people. This is because an expanding
population makes it harder to improve everybody’s standard of living.
However , if inequality in society is the main r eason for poor standar ds of
living for many people, the size of the population is relatively unimportant.
If we look around us, what can we identify as the most important
reason(s) for poor living standards?
Reprint 2025-26
Science 126What y ou hav e learnt
Reproduction, unlike other life processes, is not essential to maintain the life of an
individual organism.
Reproduction involves creation of a DNA copy and additional cellular apparatus
by the cell involved in the process.
Various or ganisms use dif ferent modes of r eproduction depending on their body
design.
In fission, many bacteria and protozoa simply divide into two or more daughter
cells.
Organisms such as hydra can regenerate if they are broken into pieces. They can
also give out buds which mature into new individuals.
Roots, stems and leaves of some plants develop into new plants through vegetative
propagation.
These are examples of asexual reproduction where new generations are created
from a single individual.
Sexual reproduction involves two individuals for the creation of a new individual.
DNA copying mechanisms creates variations which are useful for ensuring the
survival of the species. Modes of sexual reproduction allow for greater variation to
be generated.
Reproduction in flowering plants involves transfer of pollen grains from the anther
to the stigma which is referred to as pollination. This is followed by fertilisation.
Changes in the body at puberty, such as increase in breast size in girls and new
facial hair growth in boys, are signs of sexual maturation.
The male reproductive system in human beings consists of testes which produce
sperms, vas deferens, seminal vesicles, prostate gland, urethra and penis.
The female reproductive system in human beings consists of ovaries, fallopian
tubes, uterus and vagina.
Sexual reproduction in human beings involves the introduction of sperm in the
vagina of the female. Fertilisation occurs in the fallopian tube.
Contraception to avoid pregnancy can be achieved by the use of condoms, oral
pills, copper -T and other methods.QUESTIONS
?1. How is the process of pollination different from fertilisation?
2. What is the role of the seminal vesicles and the prostate gland?
3. What are the changes seen in girls at the time of puberty?
4. How does the embryo get nourishment inside the mother’s body?
5. If a woman is using a copper -T, will it help in pr otecting her fr om
sexually transmitted diseases?
Reprint 2025-26
How do Organisms Reproduce? 127EXERCISES
1.Asexual reproduction takes place through budding in
(a)Amoeba.
(b)Yeast.
(c)Plasmodium.
(d)Leishmania.
2.Which of the following is not a part of the female reproductive system in human
beings?
(a) Ovary
(b) Uterus
(c) Vas defer ens
(d) Fallopian tube
3.The anther contains
(a) sepals.
(b) ovules.
(c) pistil.
(d) pollen grains.
4.What are the advantages of sexual reproduction over asexual reproduction?
5.What are the functions performed by the testis in human beings?
6.Why does menstruation occur?
7.Draw a labelled diagram of the longitudinal section of a flower .
8.What are the different methods of contraception?
9.How are the modes for reproduction different in unicellular and
multicellular organisms?
10.How does reproduction help in providing stability to populations of species?
11.What could be the reasons for adopting contraceptive methods?
Reprint 2025-26
